
    <div><span class='pageno' title='1' id='Page_1'></span><h1 class='nobreak'>PART I<br/> <span class='sub-head'>AN EVENING AT MRS. ALDWINKLE’S</span></h1></div>

    <h2>CHAPTER I</h2>

    <p class='pindent'>The little town of Vezza stands at the confluence of two
    torrents that come down in two deep valleys from the Apuan
    mountains. Turbulently—for they still remember their mountain
    source—the united streams run through the town; silence in
    Vezza is the continuous sound of running waters. Then, gradually,
    the little river changes its character; the valley broadens out,
    soon the hills are left behind and the waters, grown placid as a
    Dutch canal, glide slowly through the meadows of the coastal
    plain and mingle with the tideless Mediterranean.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Dominating Vezza itself, a bold promontory of hill juts out like
    a wedge between the two valleys. Near the top of the hill and set
    in the midst of ilex trees and tall cypresses that rise up blackly out
    of the misty olives, stands a huge house. A solemn and regular
    façade, twenty windows wide, looks down over the terraced
    cypresses and the olive trees on to the town. Behind and above
    this façade one sees irregular masses of buildings climbing up the
    slopes beyond. And the whole is dominated by a tall slender
    tower that blossoms out at the top, after the manner of Italian
    towers, into overhanging machicolations. It is the summer palace
    of the Cybo Malaspina, one-time Princes of Massa and Carrara,
    Dukes of Vezza, and marquesses, counts and barons of various
    other villages in the immediate neighbourhood.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>The road is steep that leads up from Vezza to the palace of the
    Cybo Malaspina, perched on the hill above the town. The Italian
    sun can shine most powerfully, even in September, and olive trees
    give but little shade. The young man with the peaked cap and
    the leather wallet slung over his shoulder pushed his bicycle slowly
    and wearily up the hill. Every now and then he halted, wiped his
    face and sighed. It was on an evil day, he was thinking, on a black,
    black day for the poor postmen of Vezza that the insane old English-woman
    with the impossible name bought this palace; and a blacker
    day still when she had elected to come and live in it. In the old
    days the place had been quite empty. A couple of peasant families
    had lived in the out-houses; that was all. Not more than one letter
    a month between them, and as for telegrams—why, there had never
    been a telegram for the palace in all the memory of man. But
    those happy days were now over, and what with letters, what with
    packets of newspapers and parcels, what with expresses and telegrams,
    there was never a day and scarcely an hour in the day when
    some one from the office wasn’t toiling up to this accursed house.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>True, the young man went on thinking, one got a good tip for
    bringing a telegram or an express. But being a young man of
    sense, he preferred leisure, if a choice had to be made, to money.
    The expense of energy was not to be compensated for by the three
    francs he would receive at the end of the climb. Money brings
    no satisfaction if one has to work for it; for if one works for it
    one has no time to spend it.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>The ideal, he reflected, as he replaced his cap and once more
    started climbing, the ideal would be to win a big prize in the
    lottery. A really immense prize.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>He took out of his pocket a little slip of paper which had been
    given him only this morning by a beggar in exchange for a couple
    of soldi. It was printed with rhymed prophecies of good fortune—and
    what good fortune! The beggar had been very generous.
    He would marry the woman of his heart, have two children,
    become one of the most prosperous merchants of his city, and live
    till eighty-three. To these oracles he gave small faith. Only
    the last verse seemed to him—though he would have found it
    difficult to explain why—worthy of serious attention. The last
    verse embodied a piece of specific good advice.</p>

    <div class='poetry-container' style=''><div class='lgp'> <!-- rend=';' -->
    <p class='line0'>Intanto se vuoi vincere</p>
    <p class='line0'>Un bel ternone al Lotto,</p>
    <p class='line0'>Giuoca il sette e il sedici,</p>
    <p class='line0'>Uniti al cinquantotto.</p>
    </div></div> <!-- end poetry block --><!-- end rend -->

    <p class='pindent'>He read through the verse several times until he had got it by
    heart; then folded up the paper and put it away again. Seven,
    sixteen and fifty-eight—there certainly was something very
    attractive about those numbers.</p>

    <div class='poetry-container' style=''><div class='lgp'> <!-- rend=';' -->
    <p class='line0'>Giuoca il sette e il sedici</p>
    <p class='line0'>Uniti al cinquantotto.</p>
    </div></div> <!-- end poetry block --><!-- end rend -->

    <p class='pindent'>He had a very good mind to do as the oracle commanded. It
    was a charm, a spell to bind fate: one couldn’t fail to win with
    those three numbers. He thought of what he would do when he
    had won. He had just decided on the make of car he would buy—one
    of the new 14-40 horse-power Lancias would be more
    elegant, he thought, than a Fiat and less expensive (for he retained
    his good sense and his habits of economy even in the midst of
    overflowing wealth) than an Isotta Fraschini or a Nazzaro—when
    he found himself at the foot of the steps leading up to the palace
    door. He leaned his bicycle against the wall and, sighing profoundly,
    rang the bell. This time the butler only gave him two
    francs instead of three. Such is life, he thought, as he coasted
    down through the forest of silver olive trees towards the valley.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>The telegram was addressed to Mrs. Aldwinkle; but in the
    absence of the lady of the house, who had driven down with all her
    other guests to the Marina di Vezza for a day’s bathing, the butler
    brought the telegram to Miss Thriplow.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Miss Thriplow was sitting in a dark little Gothic room in the
    most ancient part of the palace, composing the fourteenth chapter
    of her new novel on a Corona typewriter. She was wearing a
    printed cotton frock—huge blue checks ruled, tartan-fashion, on
    a white ground—very high in the waist, very full and long in the
    skirt; a frock that was at once old-fashioned and tremendously
    contemporary, school-girlish and advanced, demure and more
    than Chelsea-ishly emancipated. The face that she turned towards
    the butler as he came in was very smooth and round and pale, so
    smooth and round that one would never have credited her with
    all the thirty years of her age. The features were small and
    regular, the eyes dark brown; and their arched brows looked as
    though they had been painted on to the porcelain mask by an
    oriental brush. Her hair was nearly black and she wore it drawn
    sleekly back from her forehead and twined in a large knot at the
    base of her neck. Her uncovered ears were quite white and very
    small. It was an inexpressive face, the face of a doll, but of an
    exceedingly intelligent doll.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>She took the telegram and opened it.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘It’s from Mr. Calamy,’ she explained to the butler. ‘He
    says he’s coming by the three-twenty and will walk up. I suppose
    you had better have his room got ready for him.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>The butler retired; but instead of going on with her work, Miss
    Thriplow leaned back in her chair and pensively lighted a cigarette.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Miss Thriplow came down at four o’clock, after her siesta,
    dressed, not in the blue and white frock of the morning, but in her
    best afternoon frock—the black silk one, with the white piping
    round the flounces. Her pearls, against this dark background,
    looked particularly brilliant. There were pearls too in her pale
    small ears; her hands were heavily ringed. After all that she had
    heard of Calamy from her hostess she had thought it necessary to
    make these preparations, and she was glad that his unexpected
    arrival was to leave her alone with him at their first introduction.
    Alone, it would be easier for her to make the right, the favourable
    first impression which is always so important.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>From what Mrs. Aldwinkle had said about him Miss Thriplow
    flattered herself that she knew just the sort of man he was. Rich,
    handsome, and what an amorist! Mrs. Aldwinkle had dwelt, of
    course, very lengthily and admiringly on that last quality. The
    smartest hostesses pursued him; he was popular in the best and
    most brilliant sets. But not a mere social butterfly, Mrs. Aldwinkle
    had insisted. On the contrary, intelligent, fundamentally serious,
    interested in the arts and so on. Moreover, he had left London
    at the height of his success and gone travelling round the world to
    improve his mind. Yes, Calamy was thoroughly serious. Miss
    Thriplow had taken all this with a grain of salt; she knew Mrs.
    Aldwinkle’s weakness for being acquainted with great men and her
    habit, when the admittedly Great were lacking, of promoting
    her common acquaintances to the rank of greatness. Deducting
    the usual seventy-five per cent. rebate from Mrs. Aldwinkle’s
    encomiums, she pictured to herself a Calamy who was one of Nature’s
    Guardsmen, touched, as Guardsmen sometimes are, with that awed
    and simple reverence for the mysteries of art, which makes these
    aristocratic autodidacts frequent the drawing-rooms where highbrows
    are to be found, makes them ask poets out to expensive
    meals, makes them buy cubist drawings, makes them even try, in
    secret, to write verses and paint themselves. Yes, yes, Miss
    Thriplow thought, she perfectly knew the type. That was why
    she had made these preparations—put on that masterpiece of a
    fashionable black dress, those pearls, those rings; that was why
    she had donned, at the same time, the dashing manner of one of
    those brilliant, equivocal-looking, high-born young women at
    whose expense, according to Mrs. Aldwinkle, he had scored his
    greatest amorous triumphs. For Miss Thriplow didn’t want to
    owe any of her success with this young man—and she liked to be
    successful with everybody—to the fact that she was a female
    novelist of good repute. She wanted, since he was one of Nature’s
    Guardsmen with a fortuitous weakness for artists, to present
    herself to him as one of Nature’s Guardswomen with a talent for
    writing equally fortuitous and unessential. She wanted to show
    him that, after all, she was quite up to all this social business, even
    though she <span class='it'>had</span> been poor once, and a governess at that (and,
    knowing her, Miss Thriplow was sure that Mrs. Aldwinkle couldn’t
    have failed to tell him that). She would meet him on level terms,
    as Guardswoman to Guardsman. Afterwards, when he had liked
    her for her Guardish qualities, they could get down to art and he
    could begin to admire her as a stylist as well as a brilliant young
    woman of his own sort.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Her first sight of him confirmed her in her belief that she had
    been right to put on all her jewellery and her dashing manner.
    For the butler ushered into the room positively the young man
    who, on the covers of illustrated magazines, presses his red lips to
    those of the young woman of his choice. No, that was a little
    unfair. He was not quite so intolerably handsome and silly as
    that. He was just one of those awfully nice, well-brought-up,
    uneducated young creatures who are such a relief, sometimes, after
    too much highbrow society. Brown, blue-eyed, soldierly and tall.
    Frightfully upper class and having all the glorious self-confidence
    that comes of having been born rich and in a secure and privileged
    position; a little insolent, perhaps, in his consciousness of good
    looks, in his memory of amorous successes. But lazily insolent;
    the roasted quails fell into his mouth; it was unnecessary to make
    an effort. His eyelids drooped in a sleepy arrogance. She knew
    all about him, at sight; oh, she knew everything.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>He stood in front of her, looking down into her face, smiling
    and with eyebrows questioningly raised, entirely unembarrassed.
    Miss Thriplow stared back at him quite as jauntily. She too
    could be insolent when she wanted to.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘You’re Mr. Calamy,’ she informed him at last.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>He inclined his head.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘My name is Mary Thriplow. Everybody else is out. I shall
    do my best to entertain you.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>He bowed again, and took her extended hand. ‘I’ve heard a
    great deal about you from Lilian Aldwinkle,’ he said.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>That she’d been a governess? Miss Thriplow wondered.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘And from lots of other people,’ he went on. ‘Not to mention
    your books.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Ah; but don’t let’s talk of those,’ she waved them airily away.
    ‘They’re irrelevant, one’s old books—irrelevant because they’re
    written by some one who has ceased to exist. Let the dead bury
    their dead. The only book that counts is the one one’s writing
    at the moment. And by the time that it’s published and other
    people have begun to read it, that too has become irrelevant. So
    that there never is a book of one’s own that it’s interesting to talk
    about.’ Miss Thriplow spoke languidly, with a little drawl,
    smiling as she spoke and looking at Calamy with half-closed eyes.
    ‘Let’s talk of something more interesting,’ she concluded.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘The weather,’ he suggested.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Why not?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Well, it’s a subject,’ said Calamy, ‘about which, as a matter
    of fact, I can speak at the moment with interest—I might almost
    say with warmth.’ He pulled out a coloured silk handkerchief
    and wiped his face. ‘Such an inferno as those dusty roads in the
    plain I never walked through before. Sometimes, I confess, in
    this Italian glare I pine for the glooms of London, the parasol of
    smoke, the haze that takes the edge off a building at a hundred
    yards and hangs mosquito netting half-way down every vista.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I remember meeting a Sicilian poet,’ said Miss Thriplow, who
    had invented this successor of Theocritus on the spur of the moment,
    ‘who said just the same. Only he preferred Manchester. <span class='it'>Bellissima</span>
    Manchester!’ She turned up her eyes and brought her
    hands together with a clap. ‘He was a specimen in that glorious
    menagerie one meets at Lady Trunion’s.’ That was a good name
    to drop casually like that. Lady Trunion’s was one of the salons
    where Nature’s Guardsmen and Guardswomen encountered the
    funnies and the fuzzy-wuzzies—in a word, the artists. By using
    the word ‘menagerie,’ Miss Thriplow put herself, with Calamy,
    on the Guardsmen’s side of the bars.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>But the effect of the talismanic name on Calamy was not what she
    had expected. ‘And does that frightful woman still continue to
    function?’ he said. ‘You must remember I’ve been away for
    a year; I’m not up to date.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Miss Thriplow hastily readjusted the expression of her face,
    the tone of her voice. Smiling with a knowing contempt, she said:
    ‘But she’s nothing to Lady Giblet, is she? For real horrors you
    must go to her. Why, the house is positively a <span class='it'>mauvais lieu</span>.’
    She moved her jewelled hand from side to side with the gesture of
    a connoisseur in horror.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Calamy did not entirely agree. ‘Vulgarer, perhaps, at the
    Giblet’s; but not worse,’ he said—and in a tone of voice, with an
    expression on his face that showed Miss Thriplow that he meant
    what he said and didn’t at the bottom of his soul secretly adore
    these social delights. ‘After having been away, as I have, for a
    year or so, to come back to civilization and find the same old people
    doing the same idiotic things—it’s astonishing. One expects
    everything to be quite different. I don’t know why; perhaps
    because one’s rather different oneself. But everything is exactly
    the same. The Giblet, the Trunion and even, let’s be frank,
    our hostess—though I’m honestly very fond of poor dear Lilian.
    There’s not the slightest change. Oh, it’s more than astonishing—it’s
    positively terrifying.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>It was at this point in the conversation that Miss Thriplow
    became aware that she had made a huge mistake, that she was sailing
    altogether on the wrong tack. Another moment and she would
    have consummated a hideous error in social judgment, have
    irreparably made what she called, in her jovial undergraduatish
    moments, a ‘floater.’ Miss Thriplow was very sensitive about
    her floaters. Memories of floaters had a way of sticking deep in
    her spirit, making wounds that never thoroughly healed. Cicatrized,
    the old scars still hurt from time to time. Suddenly, for no
    reason, in the middle of the night, or even in the middle of the
    jolliest party, she would remember an ancient floater—just like
    that, <span class='it'>à propos de bottes</span>—would remember and be overcome by a
    feeling of self-reproach and retrospective shame. And there was
    no remedy, no spiritual prophylaxis. One might do one’s best to
    invent triumphantly right and tactful alternatives to the floater—imagine
    oneself, for example, whispering to sister Fanny the
    mollifying instead of the bitter, wounding phrase; might walk in
    fancy with the airiest dignity out of Bardolph’s studio into the dirty
    little street, past the house with the canary hanging in the window
    (an exquisite touch the canary), away, away—when in fact (oh
    Lord, what a fool one had been, and how miserable, afterwards!),
    in actual fact one had stayed. One could do one’s best; but one
    could never really persuade oneself that the floater hadn’t happened.
    Imagination might struggle to annihilate the odious memory; but
    it never had power to win a decisive victory.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>And now, if she wasn’t careful, she’d have another floater
    rankling and suppurating in her memory. ‘How could I have
    been so stupid?’ she thought, ‘how could I?’ For it was obvious
    now that the dashing manner, the fashionable disguise were entirely
    inappropriate to the occasion. Calamy, it was clear, didn’t
    appreciate that sort of thing at all; he might have once, but he
    didn’t now. If she went on like this she’d have him putting her
    down as merely frivolous, worldly, a snob; and it would need time
    and enormous efforts to obliterate the disastrous first impression.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Surreptitiously Miss Thriplow slipped the opal ring from off
    the little finger of her right hand, held it for a moment, clenched
    out of sight in her left; then, when Calamy wasn’t looking, pushed
    it down into the crevice between the padded seat and the back of
    her chintz-covered arm-chair.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Terrifying!’ she echoed. ‘Yes, that’s exactly the word.
    Those things <span class='it'>are</span> terrifying. The size of the footmen!’ She held
    up one hand above her head. ‘The diameter of the strawberries!’
    She brought both hands (still far too glittering, she regretfully
    noticed, with their freight of rings) to within a foot of one another
    in front of her. ‘The inanity of the lion hunters! The roaring
    of the lions!’ It was unnecessary to do anything with her hands
    now; she dropped them back into her lap and took the opportunity
    to rid herself of the scarab and the brilliants. And like the conjuror
    who makes patter to divert attention from the workings of
    his trick, she leaned forward and began to talk very rapidly and
    earnestly. ‘And seriously,’ she went on, putting seriousness into
    her voice and smoothing the laughter out of her face, so that it was
    wonderfully round, earnest and ingenuous, ‘what rot the lions do
    roar! I suppose it’s awfully innocent of me; but I always
    imagined that celebrated people must be more interesting than
    other people. They’re not!’ She let herself fall back, rather
    dramatically, into her chair. In the process, one hand seemed to
    have got accidentally stuck behind her back. She disengaged it,
    but not before the scarab and the brilliants had been slipped into
    the cache. There was nothing left now but the emerald; that
    could stay. It was very chaste and austere. But she would never
    be able to take off her pearls without his noticing. Never—even
    though men are so inconceivably unobservant. Rings were easy
    enough to get rid of; but a necklace.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. And they weren’t even
    real pearls.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Calamy, meanwhile, was laughing. ‘I remember making the
    same discovery myself,’ he said. ‘It’s rather painful at first.
    One feels as though one has been somehow swindled and done in.
    You remember what Beethoven said: “that he seldom found in
    the playing of the most distinguished virtuosi that excellence which
    he supposed he had a right to expect.” One has a right to expect
    celebrated people to live up to their reputations; they <span class='it'>ought</span> to
    be interesting.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Miss Thriplow leaned forward again, nodding her assent with
    a child-like eagerness. ‘I know lots of obscure little people,’ she
    said, ‘who are much more interesting and much more genuine,
    one somehow feels, than the celebrated ones. It’s genuineness
    that counts, isn’t it?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Calamy agreed.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I think it’s difficult to be genuine,’ Miss Thriplow went on,
    ‘if one’s a celebrity or a public figure, or anything of that sort.’
    She became very confidential indeed. ‘I get quite frightened
    when I see my name in the papers and photographers want to take
    pictures of me and people ask me out to dinner. I’m afraid of
    losing my obscurity. Genuineness only thrives in the dark.
    Like celery.’ How little and obscure she was! How poor and
    honest, so to speak. Those roaring lions at Lady Trunion’s, those
    boring lion huntresses .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. they had no hope of passing through
    the needle’s eye.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I’m delighted to hear you saying all this,’ said Calamy. ‘If
    only all writers felt as you do!’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Miss Thriplow shook her head, modestly declining the implied
    compliment. ‘I’m like Jehovah,’ she said; ‘I just am that I
    am. That’s all. Why should I make believe that I’m somebody
    else? Though I confess,’ she added, with a greatly daring candour,
    ‘that I was intimidated by your reputation into pretending that I
    was more <span class='it'>mondaine</span> than I really am. I imagined you as being
    so tremendously worldly and smart. It’s a great relief to find
    you’re not.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Smart?’ repeated Calamy, making a grimace.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘You sounded so dazzlingly social from Mrs. Aldwinkle’s
    accounts.’ And as she spoke the words she felt herself becoming
    correspondingly obscurer and littler.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Calamy laughed. ‘Perhaps I was that sort of imbecile once,’
    he said. ‘But now—well, I hope all that’s over now.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I pictured you,’ Miss Thriplow went on, straining, in spite of
    her obscurity, to be brilliant, ‘I pictured you as one of those people
    in the <span class='it'>Sketch</span>—“walking in the Park with a friend,” you know;
    a friend who would turn out at the least to be a duchess or a distinguished
    novelist. Can you wonder that I was nervous?’
    She dropped back into the depths of her chair. Poor little
    thing! But the pearls, though not marine, were still rather an
    embarrassment.</p>

    <h2>CHAPTER II</h2>

    <p class='pindent'>Mrs. Aldwinkle, when she returned, found them on the
    upper terrace, looking at the view. It was almost the hour of
    sunset. The town of Vezza at their feet was already eclipsed by
    the shadow of the great bluff which projected, on the further side
    of the westernmost of the two valleys, into the plain. But, beyond,
    the plain was still bright. It lay, stretched out beneath them like
    a map of itself—the roads marked in white, the pinewoods dark
    green, the streams as threads of silver, ploughland and meadowland
    in chequers of emerald and brown, the railway a dark brown line
    ruled along it. And beyond its furthest fringes of pinewoods
    and sand, darkly, opaquely blue, the sea. Towards this wide
    picture, framed between the projecting hills, of which the eastern
    was still rosily flushed with the light, the western profoundly dark,
    a great flight of steps descended, past a lower terrace, down, between
    columnar cypresses, to a grand sculptured gateway half-way down
    the hill.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>They stood there in silence, leaning their elbows on the balustrade.
    Ever since she had jettisoned the Guardswoman they had
    got on, Miss Thriplow thought, most awfully well. She could
    see that he liked her combination of moral ingenuousness and
    mental sophistication, of cleverness and genuineness. Why she
    had ever thought of pretending she was anything but simple and
    natural she couldn’t now imagine. After all, that was what she
    really was—or at least what she had determined that she ought to be.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>From the entrance court on the west flank of the palace came the
    hoot of a motor horn and the sound of voices.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘There they are,’ said Miss Thriplow.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I rather wish they weren’t,’ he said, and sighing he straightened
    himself up and turned round, with his back to the view, towards
    the house. ‘It’s like heaving a great stone into a calm pool—all
    this noise, I mean.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Mentally cataloguing herself among the tranquil charms of
    evening, Miss Thriplow took the remark to be complimentary to
    herself. ‘What smashings of crystal one has to put up with,’
    she said. ‘Every other moment, if one’s at all sensitive.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Through the huge echoing saloons of the palace the sound of an
    approaching voice could be heard. ‘Calamy,’ it called, ‘Calamy!’
    mounting through the syllables of the name from a low to a
    much higher note, not, however, through any intervals known to
    music, but in a succession of uncertain and quite unrelated tones.
    ‘Calamy!’ It was as vague and tuneless as the call of an articulate
    wind. There were hurrying footsteps, a rustling of draperies.
    In the huge pompous doorway at the head of the steps leading
    down from the house to the terrace appeared the figure of
    Mrs. Aldwinkle.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘There you are!’ she called in a rapture. Calamy walked to
    meet her.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Mrs. Aldwinkle was one of those large, handsome, old-masterish
    women who look as though they had been built up from sections
    of two different people—such broad shoulders they have, so Junonian
    a form; and growing from between the shoulders such a slender
    neck, such a small, compact and childish head. They look their
    best between twenty-eight and, shall we say, five-and-thirty, when
    the body is in its perfect maturity and the neck, the little head,
    the unravaged features seem still to belong to a young girl. Their
    beauty is made the more striking, the more attractive by the curious
    incongruousness of its components.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘At thirty-three,’ Mr. Cardan used to say of her, ‘Lilian
    Aldwinkle appealed to all the instinctive bigamist in one. She
    was eighteen in the attics and widow Dido on the floors below.
    One had the impression of being with two women at the same
    time. It was most stimulating.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>He spoke, alas, in the past tense; for Mrs. Aldwinkle was no
    longer thirty-three, nor had been these twelve, these fifteen years
    or more. The Junonian form—that was still stately and as yet
    not too massive. And from behind, it is true, the head still looked
    like a child’s head set on those broad shoulders. But the face,
    which had once been so much the younger member of the partnership,
    had outstripped the body in the race through time and was
    old and worn beyond its years. The eyes were the youngest
    feature. Large, blue and rather prominent, they stared very
    glitteringly and intently out of the face. But the setting of them
    was pouchy and crow’s-footed. There were a couple of horizontal
    wrinkles across the broad forehead. Two deep folds ran down
    from the corner of the nose, past the mouth, where they were
    partially interrupted by another system of folds that moved with
    the movements of the lips, to the lower edge of the jaw, forming a
    sharp line of demarcation between the sagging cheeks and the strong,
    prominent chin. The mouth was wide, with lips of rather vague
    contour, whose indefiniteness was enhanced by Mrs. Aldwinkle’s
    very careless reddening of them. For Mrs. Aldwinkle was an
    impressionist; it was the effect at a distance, the grand theatrical
    flourish that interested her. She had no patience, even at the
    dressing-table, for niggling pre-Raphaelite detail.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>She stood there for a moment at the top of the steps, an imposing
    and majestic figure. Her long and ample dress of pale green linen
    hung down in stiff fluted folds about her. The green veil tied
    round her wide straw hat floated airily over her shoulders. She
    carried a large reticule over one arm and from her waist there
    dangled at the end of little chains a whole treasury of gold and
    silver objects.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘There you are!’ she smiled at the approaching Calamy, smiled
    what had once been a smile of piercing sweetness, of alluring
    enchantment. Its interest now, alas, was chiefly historical. With
    a gesture at once theatrically exaggerated and inexpressive, Mrs.
    Aldwinkle suddenly stretched out both her hands in welcome
    and ran down the steps to meet him. Mrs. Aldwinkle’s movements
    were as inharmonious and uncertain as her voice. She
    moved awkwardly and stiffly. The majesty of her repose was
    dissipated.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Dear Calamy,’ she cried, and embraced him. ‘I must kiss
    you,’ she said. ‘It’s such ages since I saw you.’ Then turning
    with a look of suspicion to Miss Thriplow. ‘How long has he
    been here?’ she asked.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Since before tea,’ said Miss Thriplow.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Before tea?’ Mrs. Aldwinkle echoed shrilly, as though outraged.
    ‘But why didn’t you let me know in time when you were
    coming?’ she went on, turning to Calamy. The thought that
    he had arrived when she was not there, and that he had, moreover,
    spent all this time talking with Mary Thriplow, annoyed her.
    Mrs. Aldwinkle was perpetually haunted by the fear that she was
    missing something. For a number of years now the universe had
    always seemed to be conspiring to keep her away from the places
    where the exciting things were happening and the wonderful
    words being said. She had been loth enough, this morning, to
    leave Miss Thriplow behind at the palace; Mrs. Aldwinkle didn’t
    want her guests to lead independent existences out of her sight.
    But if she had known, if she had had the slightest suspicion, that
    Calamy was going to arrive while she was away, that he would
    spend hours <span class='it'>en tête à tête</span> with Mary Thriplow—why then she
    would never have gone down to the sea at all. She’d have stayed
    at home, however tempting the prospect of a bathe.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘You seem to have made yourself extremely smart for the
    occasion,’ Mrs. Aldwinkle went on, looking at Miss Thriplow’s
    pearls and her black silk with the white piping round the flounces.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Miss Thriplow looked at the view and pretended not to have
    heard what her hostess had said. She had no wish to engage in a
    conversation on this particular subject.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Well now,’ said Mrs. Aldwinkle to her new guest, ‘I must
    show you the view and the house and all that.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Miss Thriplow’s already very kindly been doing that,’ said
    Calamy.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>At this piece of information Mrs. Aldwinkle looked extremely
    annoyed. ‘But she can’t have shown you everything,’ she said,
    ‘because she doesn’t know what there is to show. And besides,
    Mary knows nothing about the history of the place, or the Cybo
    Malaspinas, or the artists who worked on the palace, or .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.’
    she waved her hand with a gesture indicating that, in fine, Mary
    Thriplow knew nothing whatever and was completely incapable
    of showing any one round the house and its gardens.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘In any case,’ said Calamy, doing his best to say the right thing,
    ‘I’ve seen enough already to make me think the place perfectly
    lovely.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>But Mrs. Aldwinkle was not content with this spontaneous and
    untutored admiration. She was sure that he had not really seen
    the beauty of the view, that he had not understood it, not known
    how to analyse it into its component charms. She began to
    expound the prospect.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘The cypresses make such a wonderful contrast with the olives,’
    she explained, prodding the landscape with the tip of her parasol,
    as though she were giving a lantern lecture with coloured slides.</p>

    <p class='pindent'><span class='it'>She</span> understood it all, of course; <span class='it'>she</span> was entirely qualified to
    appreciate it in every detail. For the view was now her property.
    It was therefore the finest in the world; but at the same time, she
    alone had the right to let you know the fact.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>We are all apt to value unduly those things which happen to
    belong to us. Provincial picture galleries are always stuffed with
    Raphaels and Giorgiones. The most brilliant metropolis in
    Christendom, according to its inhabitants, is Dublin. My gramophone
    and my Ford car are better than yours. And how pathetically
    boring are those poor but cultured tourists who show us their
    collection of picture postcards with as much pride as if they had
    been the original paintings themselves.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>With the palace Mrs. Aldwinkle had purchased vast domains
    unmentioned in the contract. She had bought, to begin with,
    the Cybo Malaspina and their history. This family, whose only
    claim to fame is to have produced, a little before its extinction, that
    Prince of Massa Carrara to whom the Old Woman in ‘Candide’—when
    she was young and a Pope’s ravishing daughter—was once
    engaged to be married, had now become for Mrs. Aldwinkle as
    splendid as the Gonzaga, the Este, the Medici, or the Visconti.
    Even the dull Dukes of Modena, the tenants of the palace (except
    during the brief Napoleonic interlude) between the extinction of
    the Cybo Malaspina and the foundation of the Kingdom of Italy,
    even the Dukes of Modena had so far profited by their connection
    with the place that for Mrs. Aldwinkle they were now patrons of
    letters and fathers of their people. And Napoleon’s sister, Elisa
    Bacciochi, who had, while Princess of Lucca, passed more than
    one hot summer on these heights, had come to be credited by the
    present owner with an unbounded enthusiasm for the arts and,
    what in Mrs. Aldwinkle’s eyes was almost more splendid, an unbounded
    enthusiasm for love. In Elisa Buonaparte-Bacciochi
    Mrs. Aldwinkle had acquired a sister soul, whom she alone understood.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>It was the same with the landscape. It was hers down to the
    remote horizon, and nobody but she could really give it its due,
    And then, how she appreciated the Italians! Ever since she had
    bought a house in Italy, she had become the one foreigner who knew
    them intimately. The whole peninsula and everything it contained
    were her property and her secret. She had bought its arts,
    its music, its melodious language, its literature, its wine and cooking,
    the beauty of its women and the virility of its Fascists. She had
    acquired Italian passion: <span class='it'>cuore</span>, <span class='it'>amore</span> and <span class='it'>dolore</span> were hers. Nor
    had she forgotten to buy the climate—the finest in Europe—the
    fauna—and how proud she was when she read in her morning
    paper that a wolf had devoured a Pistoiese sportsman within fifteen
    miles of home!—the flora—especially the red anemones and the
    wild tulips—the volcanoes—still so wonderfully active—the
    earthquakes.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘And now,’ said Mrs. Aldwinkle, when she had polished off
    the view, ‘now we must look at the house.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>She turned her back on the view. ‘This part of the palace,’
    she said, continuing her lecture, ‘dates from about 1630.’ She
    pointed upwards with her parasol; the coloured slides were now
    architectural. ‘A very fine specimen of early baroque. What
    remains of the old castle, with the tower, constitutes the eastern
    wing of the present house.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Miss Thriplow, who had heard all this before, listened none the
    less with the rapt expression of interest that one sees on the faces
    of children at Royal Institution lectures; partly to atone in Mrs.
    Aldwinkle’s eyes for the offence of having been at home when
    Calamy arrived, and partly to impress Calamy himself with her
    capacity for being frankly, totally and uncritically absorbed in
    the little affairs of the moment.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Now I’ll show you the inside of the palace,’ said Mrs. Aldwinkle,
    mounting the steps that led from the terrace to the house; her
    treasures jingled at the end of their chains. Obediently Miss
    Thriplow and Calamy followed in her wake.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Most of the paintings,’ proclaimed Mrs. Aldwinkle, ‘are by
    Pasquale da Montecatini. A great painter—dreadfully underrated.’
    She shook her head.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Miss Thriplow was somewhat embarrassed when, at this remark,
    her companion turned to her and made a hardly perceptible grimace.
    Whether to smile confidentially and ironically back, whether to
    ignore the grimace and preserve the Royal Institution expression—that
    was the question. In the end she decided to ignore the tacit
    confidence.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>On the threshold of the great saloon they were met by a young
    girl dressed in a frock of pale pink linen, with a very young round
    face (otherwise ingenuous than Miss Thriplow’s) looking out of a
    rectangular window cut in a short smooth bell of copper-coloured
    hair. A pair of wide-open pale blue eyes looked out from beneath
    the straight metallic fringe. Her nose was small and delicately
    snubby. A short upper lip made her look at once pathetic and
    merry, like a child. It was Mrs. Aldwinkle’s niece, Irene.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>She shook hands with Calamy.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I suppose,’ he said, ‘that I ought to tell you that you’ve grown
    up tremendously since I saw you last. But the truth is that I
    don’t think you have at all.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I can’t help my appearance,’ she answered. ‘But inside .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.’
    Inside Irene was older than the rocks on which she sat. It was
    not for nothing that she had passed the five most impressionable
    years of her life under her Aunt Lilian’s guardianship.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Mrs. Aldwinkle impatiently cut short the conversation. ‘I
    want you to look at this ceiling,’ she said to Calamy. Like hens
    drinking they stared up at the rape of Europa. Mrs. Aldwinkle
    lowered her gaze. ‘And the rustic work with the group of marine
    deities.’ In a pair of large niches, lined with shell-work and sponge-stone,
    two fishy groups furiously writhed. ‘So delightfully
    <span class='it'>seicento</span>,’ said Mrs. Aldwinkle.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Irene, meanwhile, feeling herself excused by long familiarity
    from paying much attention to the marine deities, had noticed that
    the loose cretonne covers of the arm-chairs were crumpled. Being
    naturally tidy—and since she had lived with Aunt Lilian she had
    had to be tidy for two—she tiptoed across the room to smooth
    them out. Bending down to the nearest of the chairs, she took
    hold of the loose cover near the front of the seat and gave it a smart
    pull down, so as to loosen it completely before she tucked it tidily
    in again. The stuff came forward like a suddenly bellying sail
    and with it there was shot out—from nowhere, as though Irene
    had been doing a conjuring trick—a glittering shower of jewels.
    They rattled on the floor, they rolled over the tiles. The noise
    disturbed Miss Thriplow in her rapt and child-like contemplation
    of the sponge-stone niches. She turned round just in time to see a
    scarab ring racing towards her, with the limp of an eccentric hoop,
    across the tiles. Arrived within a few feet of her it lost speed, it
    staggered, it fell on its side. Miss Thriplow picked it up.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Oh, it’s only my rings,’ she said airily, as though it were the
    most natural thing in the world for her rings to come jumping out
    of the chair when Irene straightened out the cover. ‘That’s all,’
    she added reassuringly to Irene, who was standing, as though
    petrified by surprise, looking down at the scattered jewels.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Mrs. Aldwinkle was fortunately absorbed in telling Calamy
    about Pasquale da Montecatini.</p>

    <h2>CHAPTER III</h2>

    <p class='pindent'>Dinner was served in the Saloon of the Ancestors. In
    Mrs. Aldwinkle’s enthusiastic imagination what marvellous
    symposia had been held within those walls—centuries even before
    they were built—what intellectual feasts! Aquinas, here, had
    confided to an early Malaspina his secret doubt on the predictability
    of rollations, had twitted the robber marquess, over a goblet of
    wine, with the feebleness of his synderesis. Dante had insisted
    on the advantages of having a Platonic mistress whom one never
    met and who could, when necessary, be identified with Theology.
    Peter of Picardy, meanwhile, on his way to Rome had recited
    from his rhymed version of <span class='it'>Physiologus</span> the lines on the Hyaena,
    a beast which, besides being an hermaphrodite, carries in its eye
    a stone which, held by a man in his mouth, permits him to see the
    future; it symbolizes moreover avarice and lasciviousness. Learned
    Boccaccio had discoursed on the genealogy of the gods. Pico della
    Mirandola, over the boar’s head, quoted the kabbala in support
    of the doctrine of the Trinity. Michelangelo had expounded his
    plans for the façade of San Lorenzo in Florence. Galileo had
    speculated why it is only up to thirty-two feet that Nature abhors
    a vacuum. Marini had astonished with his conceits. Luca
    Giordano, for a wager, had painted, between the roast and the
    dessert, a full-sized picture of Hannibal crossing the Alps.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
    And then, what brilliant ladies heightened the lustre of these
    feasts! Lovely, perennially young, accomplished as the protagonists
    of Castiglione’s <span class='it'>Courtier</span>, amorous in the extreme—they
    inspired the men of genius to yet higher flights, they capped their
    hardiest sallies with a word of feminine grace.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>It had been Mrs. Aldwinkle’s ambition, ever since she bought
    the palace, to revive these ancient glories. She saw herself, unofficially
    a princess, surrounded by a court of poets, philosophers
    and artists. Beautiful women should swim through the great
    saloons and the gardens, glowing with love for the men of genius.
    And periodically—for the apartment of the dwarfs, which the
    Cybo Malaspina, in imitation of the Gonzaga, had included in
    their palace, demanded appropriate inhabitants to furnish it—periodically
    they should bring forth, painlessly, children to the men
    of genius—all curly-headed, fully toothed and two years old on the
    day of birth, and all infant prodigies. Rows of little Mozarts.
    In a word, the palace of Vezza should re-become what it had
    never been except in Mrs. Aldwinkle’s fancy.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>What it had been in fact one could only guess by looking at the
    faces of the Ancestors who gave the banqueting-hall its name.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>From circular niches set high in the walls of the huge square
    room the lords of Massa Carrara looked out, bust after bust, across
    the intervening centuries. Right round the room they went,
    beginning on the left of the fireplace and ending, with the penultimate
    Cybo Malaspina, who arranged the room, on the right.
    And as marquess succeeded marquess and prince, prince, an expression
    of ever profounder imbecility made itself apparent on the
    faces of the Ancestors. The vulture’s nose, the formidable jaw of
    the first robber marquess transformed themselves by gradual
    degrees into the vague proboscides of ant-eaters, into criminally
    prognathous deformities. The foreheads grew lower with every
    generation, the marble eyes stared ever blanklier and the look of
    conscious pride became more and more strongly marked on every
    countenance. It was the boast of the Cybo Malaspina that they
    had never married beneath them and that their heirs had always
    been legitimate. One had only to look at the faces of the last three
    Princes to feel sure that the boast was amply justified. Were
    these the Muses’ friends?</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘You can imagine the splendour of the scene,’ said Mrs. Aldwinkle
    rapturously as she entered the Saloon of the Ancestors on
    Calamy’s arm. ‘The innumerable candles, the silks, the jewels.
    And all the crowd manœuvring in the most stately manner according
    to the rules of etiquette.’ The last representative, albeit
    adoptive, of these gorgeous beings, Mrs. Aldwinkle lifted her head
    still higher and with a still more swelling port sailed across the
    huge room towards the little table where, in shrunken splendour,
    the successors of Cybo Malaspina were to dine. The train of
    her coral-coloured velvet dress rustled after her.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘It must have been very fine,’ Calamy agreed. ‘Certainly,
    from the point of view of picturesqueness, we’ve lost by the
    passing of etiquette. One wonders how much further informality
    will go. Mr. Gladstone, in his old age, paid a visit to Oxford and
    was horrified to observe the new fashions in undergraduates’ dress.
    In his young days every young man who respected himself had at
    least one pair of trousers in which he never sat down for fear of
    making them bag at the knees, while the outfit in which he normally
    walked about the streets was never worth less than seventy or eighty
    pounds. And yet, in the time of Mr. Gladstone’s visit, the undergraduates
    still wore stiff collars and bowler hats. What would he
    have said if he could have seen them now? And what shall we
    say fifty years hence?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>The company disposed itself round the table. Calamy, as the
    new arrival, occupied the place of honour on Mrs. Aldwinkle’s
    right.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘You’ve broached a very interesting subject,’ said Mr. Cardan,
    who sat opposite him, on their hostess’s left. ‘Very interesting,’
    he repeated, as he unfolded his napkin. Mr. Cardan was a middle-sized,
    thickly built man. The upper hem of his trousers followed
    an ample geodesic; his shoulders were very broad, his neck short
    and powerful. The red face looked tough and knobbly like the
    head of a cudgel. It was an enigmatic and equivocal face, whose
    normal expression was at once gross and sensitively refined, serious
    and sly. The mouth was small and its thin lips fitted tightly
    together, as though they were the moving parts of a very well made
    piece of furniture. The line that marked the meeting of the lips
    was almost straight, but at one end its horizontal gravity was
    deflected a trifle downwards, so that Mr. Cardan seemed to be
    for ever in process of suppressing a wry smile that was for ever
    importunately troubling his demureness. The hair was smooth,
    silvery and saintly. The nose was short and straight, like a lion’s—but
    a lion’s that had become, with time and good living, rather
    bottled. Looking out from the midst of a web-work of fine wrinkles,
    the eyes were small, but bright and very blue. As the result, perhaps,
    of an illness—or perhaps it was merely under the weight of
    five-and-sixty years—one white eyebrow had settled down permanently
    lower than the other. From the right side of his face
    Mr. Cardan looked at you mysteriously and confidentially through
    the gap in a kind of chronic wink. But from the left the glance
    was supercilious and aristocratic, as though the western socket had
    been stretched by an invisible monocle a size or so too large for it.
    An expression of benevolence mingled with malice shone in his
    glance while he was talking; and when he laughed, every polished
    red facet of his cudgel’s face twinkled with mirth, as though
    suddenly illumined from within. Mr. Cardan was neither a
    poet nor a philosopher; nor of a remarkably brilliant family; but
    Mrs. Aldwinkle, who had known him intimately for many years,
    justified his inclusion among her courtiers on the ground that he
    was one of the obscure Great: potentially anything he chose to
    be, but actually, through indolence, unknown.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Mr. Cardan took a couple of spoonfuls of soup before proceeding.
    ‘A very interesting subject,’ he repeated yet again. He had a
    melodious voice, ripe, round, fruity and powdered, as it were,
    with a bloom of huskiness—the faint hoarseness of those who have
    drunk well, eaten well and copiously made love. ‘Formality,
    external pomp, etiquette—their practical disappearance from
    modern life is really a most extraordinary thing, when you come
    to think of it. Formality and pomp were one of the essential
    features of ancient government. Tyranny tempered by transformation
    scenes—that was the formula of all governments in the
    seventeenth century, particularly in Italy. Provided you treated
    your people to a procession or some similarly spectacular function
    once a month or thereabouts, you could do whatever you pleased.
    It was the papal method <span class='it'>par excellence</span>. But it was imitated by
    every grand seigneur, down to the most piddling little count in
    the peninsula. Look how all the architecture of the period is
    conditioned by the need for display. The architect was there to
    make backgrounds for the incessant amateur theatricals of his
    employers. Huge vistas of communicating saloons to march down,
    avenues for processions, vast flights of steps to do the Grand
    Monarch descent from the skies. No comfort—since comfort
    is only private—but an immense amount of splendour to impress
    the spectator from outside. Napoleon was the last ruler to practise
    it systematically and scientifically on the grand scale. Those
    reviews, those triumphal entries and exits, those coronations and
    weddings and christenings, all those carefully prepared stage effects—why,
    they were half his secret. And now these pomps are no
    more. Are our rulers so stupid and so regardless of the lessons of
    history that they neglect these aids to government? Or can it be
    that tastes have changed, that the public no longer demands these
    shows and is no longer impressed by them? I put the question
    to our political friends.’ Mr. Cardan leaned forward, and looking
    past Miss Thriplow, who sat on his left, smiled at the young man
    who sat beyond her and at the older man occupying the corresponding
    place on the opposite side of the table, next to Irene Aldwinkle.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>The young man, who looked even younger than he really was—and
    at best it was only two or three months since Lord Hovenden
    had attained his majority—smiled amiably at Mr. Cardan and
    shook his head, then turned hopefully to the person who sat opposite
    him. ‘Ask me anover,’ he said. Lord Hovenden still found it
    difficult to pronounce a th. ‘What do you say, Mr. Falx?’ An
    expression of respectful attention appeared on his boyish, freckled
    face as he waited for Mr. Falx’s answer. Whatever the answer
    might be, it was obvious that Lord Hovenden would regard it as
    oracular. He admired, he revered Mr. Falx.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Mr. Falx, indeed, invited admiration and respect. With his
    white beard, his long and curly white hair, his large dark liquid
    eyes, his smooth broad forehead and aquiline nose, he had the air
    of a minor prophet. Nor were appearances deceptive. In another
    age, in other surroundings, Mr. Falx would in all probability have
    been a minor prophet: a denouncer, a mouthpiece of the Lord,
    a caller to salvation, a threatener of wrath to come. Having been
    born in the middle of the nineteenth century and having passed
    the years of his early manhood in the profession which, between
    three and seven, every male child desires to embrace—that of the
    engine driver—he had become not exactly a prophet, but a Labour
    leader.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Lord Hovenden, whose claim to figure in Mrs. Aldwinkle’s
    court was the fact that she had known him since he was a baby,
    that he was descended from Simon de Montfort, and that he was
    immensely rich, had added a further merit: he had become an
    ardent Guild Socialist. An earnest young schoolmaster had first
    apprised him of the fact—hitherto but very imperfectly realized
    by Lord Hovenden—that there are a great many poor people
    whose lives are extremely disagreeable and arduous and who, if
    justice were done, would be better off than they are at present.
    His generous impulses were stirred. Youthfully, he desired to
    precipitate an immediate millennium. Perhaps, too, a certain
    egotistical ambition to distinguish himself above his fellows had
    something to do with his enthusiasm. Among persons born in
    privileged positions and in the midst of wealth, snobbery often
    takes a form rather different from that which it commonly assumes.
    Not always, indeed; for there are plenty of rich and titled persons
    who regard wealth and title with the same abject respect as is
    shown by those whose acquaintance with the nobility and the
    plutocracy is only in fiction and the pages of the weekly papers.
    But others, whose ambition it is to climb out of the familiar surroundings
    into, at any rate intellectually, higher spheres, become
    infected with a passionate snobbery in regard to the artistic or
    political world. This snobbery—the snobbery of blood towards
    brain—had mingled without his being conscious of it with Lord
    Hovenden’s purely humanitarian ardour, and had given it added
    strength. Lord Hovenden’s pleasure at being introduced to
    Mr. Falx had been enormous, and the thought that he alone, of
    all his friends and relations, enjoyed the privilege of Mr. Falx’s
    acquaintance, that he alone was free of the exciting political world
    in which Mr. Falx lived, had made him more than ever enthusiastic
    in the cause of justice. There had been occasions, however—and
    they had become more frequent of late—when Lord Hovenden
    had found that the demands made on him by a strenuous social
    life left him very little time for Mr. Falx or Guild Socialism. For
    one who danced as long and often as he did it was difficult to pay
    much attention to anything else. In lulls between the merrymaking
    he remembered with shame that he had not done his duty
    by his principles. It was to make up for arrears in enthusiasm
    that he had cut short his grouse shooting to accompany Mr. Falx
    to an International Labour Conference in Rome. The conference
    was to be held towards the end of September; but Lord Hovenden
    had sacrificed a month’s more shooting than was necessary by
    suggesting that, before the conference, Mr. Falx and he should
    go to stay for a few weeks with Mrs. Aldwinkle. ‘Come when
    you like and bring whom you like.’ Those were the words of
    Lilian’s invitation. He telegraphed to Mrs. Aldwinkle to say
    that Mr. Falx needed a holiday and that he proposed to bring him;
    Mrs. Aldwinkle replied that she would be delighted to have him.
    There they were.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Mr. Falx paused for a moment before answering Mr. Cardan’s
    question. He turned his bright dark eyes round the table, as
    though collecting everybody’s attention; then spoke in the penetrating
    musical voice that had stirred so many audiences to enthusiasm.
    ‘Twentieth-century rulers,’ he said, ‘respect the
    educated democracy too much to try to bamboozle it and keep it
    falsely contented by mere shows. Democracies demand reason.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Oh, come,’ protested Mr. Cardan. ‘What about Mr. Bryan’s
    agitation against Evolution?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Moreover,’ Mr. Falx went on, ignoring the point, ‘we in the
    twentieth century have outgrown that sort of thing.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Perhaps we have,’ said Mr. Cardan. ‘Though I can’t imagine
    how we should have. Opinions change, of course, but the love
    of a show isn’t an opinion. It’s founded on something deeper,
    something which has no business to change.’ Mr. Cardan shook
    his head. ‘It reminds me,’ he went on after a little pause, ‘of
    another, similarly deep-rooted change that I can never account for:
    the change in our susceptibility to flattery. It’s impossible to
    read any ancient moralist without finding copious warnings against
    flatterers. “A flattering mouth worketh ruin”—it’s in the
    Bible. And the reward of the flatterer is also specified there.
    “He that speaketh flattery to his friends, even the eyes of his
    children shall fail”—though one would have thought that the
    vicariousness of the threatened punishment rendered it a little less
    formidable. But at any rate, in ancient days the great and the
    prosperous seem to have been fairly at the mercy of flatterers.
    And they laid it on so thick, they did their job, from all accounts,
    so extremely coarsely! Can it be that the educated plutocracy
    of those days was really taken in by that sort of thing? It wouldn’t
    be now. The flattery would have to be a great deal more subtle
    nowadays to produce the same effect. Moreover, I never find in
    the works of the modern moralists any warnings against flatterers.
    There’s been some sort of change; though how it has come about,
    I really don’t quite know.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Perhaps there has been a moral progress,’ suggested Mr. Falx.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Lord Hovenden turned his eyes from Mr. Falx’s face, on which,
    while he was speaking, they had been reverently fixed, and smiled
    at Mr. Cardan with an air of inquiring triumph that seemed to
    ask whether he had any answer to make to that.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Perhaps,’ repeated Mr. Cardan, rather dubiously.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Calamy suggested another reason. ‘It’s surely due,’ he said,
    ‘to the change in the position of the great and the prosperous.
    In the past they regarded themselves and were regarded by others
    as being what they were by divine right. Consequently, the
    grossest flattery seemed to them only their due. But now the right
    to be a prince or a millionaire seems a little less divine than it did.
    Flattery which once seemed only an expression of proper respect
    now sounds excessive; and what in the past was felt to be almost
    sincere is now regarded as ironical.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I think you may be right,’ said Mr. Cardan. ‘One result, at
    any rate, of this slump in flattery has been a great alteration in
    the technique of the parasite.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Has the technique of the parasite ever altered?’ asked
    Mr. Falx. Lord Hovenden passed on his question to Mr. Cardan
    in an interrogating smile. ‘Hasn’t he always been the same—living
    on the labours of society without contributing to the common
    stock?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘We are speaking of different sorts of parasites,’ Mr. Cardan
    explained, twinkling genially at the minor prophet. ‘Your
    parasites are the idle rich; mine are the idle poor who live on the
    idle rich. Big fleas have little fleas; I was referring to the tapeworms
    of tapeworms. A most interesting class, I assure you;
    and one that has never really had its due from the natural historians
    of humanity. True, there’s Lucian’s great work on the art of
    being a parasite, and a very fine work too; but a little out of date,
    particularly where flattery is concerned. Better than Lucian is
    Diderot. But the <span class='it'>Neveu de Rameau</span> deals with only a single type
    of parasite, and that not the most successful or the most worthy of
    imitation. Mr. Skimpole in <span class='it'>Bleak House</span> isn’t bad. But he lacks
    subtlety; he’s not a perfect model for the budding tapeworm.
    The fact is that no writer, so far as I’m aware, has really gone into
    the question of parasites. I feel their remissness,’ Mr. Cardan
    added, twinkling first at Mrs. Aldwinkle, then round the table at
    her guests, ‘almost as a personal affront. Professing as I do—or
    perhaps trying to profess would be a more accurate description—the
    parasitical mystery, I regard this conspiracy of silence as most
    insulting.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘How absurd you are,’ said Mrs. Aldwinkle. The complacent
    references to his own moral defects and weaknesses were frequent
    in Mr. Cardan’s conversation. To disarm criticism by himself
    forestalling it, to shock and embarrass those susceptible of embarrassment,
    to air his own freedom from the common prejudices
    by lightly owning to defects which others would desire to conceal—it
    was to achieve these ends that Mr. Cardan so cheerfully gave
    himself away. ‘Absurd!’ Mrs. Aldwinkle repeated.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Mr. Cardan shook his head. ‘Not at all absurd,’ he said.
    ‘I’m only telling the truth. For alas, it is true that I’ve never
    really been a successful parasite. I could have been a pretty
    effective flatterer; but unfortunately I happen to live in an age
    when flattery doesn’t work. I might have made a tolerably good
    buffoon, if I were a little stupider and a little more high-spirited.
    But even if I could have been a buffoon, I should certainly have
    thought twice before taking up that branch of parasitism. It’s
    dangerous being a court fool, it’s most precarious. You may
    please for a time; but in the end you either bore or offend your
    patrons. Diderot’s <span class='it'>Neveu de Rameau</span> is the greatest literary
    specimen of the type; you know what a wretched sort of life he
    led. No, your permanently successful parasite, at any rate in
    modern times, belongs to an entirely different type—a type,
    alas, to which by no possible ingenuity could I make myself
    conform.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I should hope not,’ said Mrs. Aldwinkle, standing up for
    Mr. Cardan’s Better Self.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Mr. Cardan bowed his acknowledgments and continued. ‘All
    the really successful parasites I have come across recently belong
    to the same species,’ he said. ‘They’re quiet, they’re gentle,
    they’re rather pathetic. They appeal to the protective maternal
    instincts. They generally have some charming talent—never
    appreciated by the gross world, but recognized by the patron,
    vastly to his credit of course; (that flattery’s most delicate). They
    never offend, like the buffoon; they don’t obtrude themselves,
    but gaze with dog-like eyes; they can render themselves, when
    their presence would be tiresome, practically non-existent. The
    protection of them satisfies the love of dominion and the altruistic
    parental instinct that prompts us to befriend the weak. You
    could write at length about all this,’ went on Mr. Cardan, turning
    to Miss Thriplow. ‘You could make a big deep book out of it.
    I should have done it myself, if I had been an author; and but for
    the grace of God, I might have been. I give you the suggestion.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>In words of one syllable Miss Thriplow thanked him. She
    had been very mousey all through dinner. After all the risks she
    had run this afternoon, the floaters she had stood on the brink of,
    she thought it best to sit quiet and look as simple and genuine as
    possible. A few slight alterations in her toilet before dinner had
    made all the difference. She had begun by taking off the pearl
    necklace and even, in spite of the chastity of its design, the emerald
    ring. That’s better, she had said to herself as she looked at
    the obscure little person in the simple black frock—without a
    jewel, and the hands so white and frail, the face so pale and smooth—who
    stood opposite her in the looking-glass. ‘How frankly and
    innocently she looks at you with those big brown eyes!’ She
    could imagine Calamy saying that to Mr. Cardan; but what
    Mr. Cardan would answer she couldn’t quite guess; he was such
    a cynic. Opening a drawer, she had pulled out a black silk shawl—not
    the Venetian one with the long fringes, but the much less
    romantic bourgeois, English shawl that had belonged to her mother.
    She draped it over her shoulders and with her two hands drew it
    together across her bosom. In the pier glass she seemed almost a
    nun; or better still, she thought, a little girl in a convent school—one
    of a hundred black-uniformed couples, with lace-frilled pantalettes
    coming down over their ankles, walking in a long, long
    crocodile, graded from five foot eight at the head to four foot
    nothing at the tail. But if she looped the thing up, hood fashion,
    over her head, she’d be still more obscure, still poorer and honester—she’d
    be a factory girl, click-clicking along on her clogs to the
    cotton mill. But perhaps that would be carrying things a little
    too far. After all, she wasn’t a Lancashire lass. Awfully cultured,
    but not spoilt; clever, but simple and genuine. That was what
    she was. In the end she had come down to dinner with the black
    shawl drawn very tightly round her shoulders. Very small and
    mousey. The head girl in the convent school had all the
    accomplishments; but, for the present, wouldn’t speak unless
    she were spoken to. Modestly, then, demurely, she thanked
    him.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Meanwhile,’ Mr. Cardan continued, ‘the sad fact remains
    that I have never succeeded in persuading anybody to become
    completely responsible for me. True, I’ve eaten quintals of other
    people’s food, drunk hectolitres of their liquor’—he raised his glass
    and looking over the top of it at his hostess, emptied it to her health—‘for
    which I’m exceedingly grateful. But I’ve never contrived
    to live permanently at their expense. Nor have they, for their
    part, shown the slightest sign of wanting to take me for ever to
    themselves. Mine’s not the right sort of character, alas. I’m
    not pathetic. I’ve never struck the ladies as being particularly
    in need of maternal ministrations. Indeed, if I ever had any
    success with them—I trust I may say so without fatuity—it was
    due to my strength rather than to my feebleness. At sixty-six,
    however .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.’ He shook his head sadly. ‘And yet one doesn’t,
    by compensation, become any the more pathetic.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Mr. Falx, whose moral ideas were simple and orthodox, shook
    his head; he didn’t like this sort of thing. Mr. Cardan, moreover,
    puzzled him. ‘Well,’ he pronounced, ‘all that I can say is this:
    when we’ve been in power for a little there won’t be any parasites
    of Mr. Cardan’s kind for the simple reason that there won’t be any
    parasites of any kind. They’ll all be doing their bit.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Luckily,’ said Mr. Cardan, helping himself again to the mixed
    fry, ‘I shall be dead by that time. I couldn’t face the world after
    Mr. Falx’s friends have dosed it with Keating’s and vermifuge.
    Ah, all you young people,’ he went on, turning to Miss Thriplow,
    ‘what a fearful mistake you made, being born when you were!’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I wouldn’t change,’ said Miss Thriplow.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Nor would I,’ Calamy agreed.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Nor I,’ Mrs. Aldwinkle echoed, ardently associating herself
    with the party of youth. She felt as young as they did. Younger
    indeed; for having been young when the world was younger, she
    had the thoughts and the feelings of a generation that had grown
    up placidly in sheltered surroundings—or perhaps had not grown
    up at all. The circumstances which had so violently and unnaturally
    matured her juniors had left her, stiffened as she already
    was by time into a definite mould, unchanged. Spiritually, they
    were older than she.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I don’t see that it would be possible to live in a more exciting
    age,’ said Calamy. ‘The sense that everything’s perfectly provisional
    and temporary—everything, from social institutions to
    what we’ve hitherto regarded as the most sacred scientific truths—the
    feeling that nothing, from the Treaty of Versailles to the rationally
    explicable universe, is really safe, the intimate conviction that
    anything may happen, anything may be discovered—another war,
    the artificial creation of life, the proof of continued existence after
    death—why, it’s all infinitely exhilarating.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘And the possibility that everything may be destroyed?’
    questioned Mr. Cardan.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘That’s exhilarating too,’ Calamy answered, smiling.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Mr. Cardan shook his head. ‘It may be rather tame of me,’
    he said, ‘but I confess, I prefer a more quiet life. I persist that
    you made a mistake in so timing your entry into the world that the
    period of your youth coincided with the war and your early maturity
    with this horribly insecure and unprosperous peace. How incomparably
    better I managed my existence! I made my entry
    in the late fifties—almost a twin to <span class='it'>The Origin of Species</span>.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. I
    was brought up in the simple faith of nineteenth-century materialism;
    a faith untroubled by doubts and as yet unsophisticated by
    that disquieting scientific modernism which is now turning the
    staunchest mathematical physicists into mystics. We were all
    wonderfully optimistic then; believed in progress and the ultimate
    explicability of everything in terms of physics and chemistry,
    believed in Mr. Gladstone and our own moral and intellectual
    superiority over every other age. And no wonder. For we were
    growing richer and richer every day. The lower classes, whom
    it was still permissible to call by that delightful name, were still
    respectful, and the prospect of revolution was still exceedingly
    remote. True, we were at the same time becoming faintly but
    uncomfortably aware that these lower classes led a rather disagreeable
    life, and that perhaps the economic laws were not quite
    so unalterable by human agency as Mr. Buckle had so comfortingly
    supposed. And when our dividends came rolling in—I still had
    dividends at that time,’ said Mr. Cardan parenthetically and
    sighed—‘came rolling in as regular as the solstices, we did, it is
    true, feel almost a twinge of social conscience. But we triumphantly
    allayed those twinges by subscribing to Settlements in the
    slums, or building, with a little of our redundant cash, a quite
    superfluous number of white-tiled lavatories for our workers.
    Those lavatories were to us what papal indulgences were to the
    less enlightened contemporaries of Chaucer. With the bill for
    those lavatories in our waistcoat pocket we could draw our next
    quarter’s dividends with a conscience perfectly serene. It justified
    us, too, even in our little frolics. And what frolics we had!
    Discreetly, of course. For in those days we couldn’t do things
    quite as openly as you do now. But it was very good fun, all the
    same. I seem to remember a quite phenomenal number of bachelor
    dinner parties at which ravishing young creatures used to come
    popping out of giant pies and dance <span class='it'>pas seuls</span> among the crockery
    on the table.’ Mr. Cardan slowly shook his head and was silent
    in an ecstasy of recollection.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘It sounds quite idyl-lic,’ said Miss Thriplow, drawlingly. She
    had a way of lovingly lingering over any particularly rare or juicy
    word that might find its way into her sentences.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘It was,’ Mr. Cardan affirmed. ‘And the more so, I think,
    because it was so entirely against the rules of those good old days,
    and because so much discretion did have to be used. It may be
    merely that I’m old and that my wits have thickened with my
    arteries; but it does seem to me that love isn’t quite so exciting now
    as it used to be in my youth. When skirts touch the ground, the
    toe of a protruding shoe is an allurement. And there were skirts,
    in those days, draping everything. There was no frankness, no
    seen reality; only imagination. We were powder magazines of
    repression and the smallest hint was a spark. Nowadays, when
    young women go about in kilts and are as bare-backed as wild horses,
    there’s no excitement. The cards are all on the table, nothing’s
    left to fancy. All’s above-board and consequently boring.
    Hypocrisy, besides being the tribute vice pays to virtue, is also one
    of the artifices by which vice renders itself more interesting. And
    between ourselves,’ said Mr. Cardan, taking the whole table into
    his confidence, ‘it can’t do without those artifices. There’s a
    most interesting passage on this subject in Balzac’s <span class='it'>Cousine Bette</span>.
    You remember the story?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Such a wonderful .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.!’ exclaimed Mrs. Aldwinkle, with
    that large and indistinct enthusiasm evoked in her by every masterpiece
    of art.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘It’s where Baron Hulot falls under the spell of Madame
    Marneffe: the old beau of the empire and the young woman
    brought up on the Romantic Revival and early Victorian virtues.
    Let me see if I can remember it.’ Mr. Cardan thoughtfully
    frowned, was silent for a moment, then proceeded in an almost
    flawless French. ‘ “Cet homme de l’empire, habitué au genre
    empire, devait ignorer absolument les façons de l’amour moderne,
    les nouveaux scrupules, les différentes conversations inventées depuis
    1830, et où la ‘pauvre faible femme’ finit par se faire considérer
    comme la victime des désirs de son amant, comme une sœur de
    charité qui panse des blessures, comme un ange qui se dévoue. Ce
    nouvel art d’aimer consomme énormément de paroles évangéliques
    à l’œuvre du diable. La passion est un martyre. On aspire à
    l’idéal, à l’infini de part et d’autre; l’on veut devenir meilleur
    par l’amour. Toutes ces belles phrases sont un prétexte à mettre
    encore plus d’ardeur dans la pratique, plus de rage dans les chutes
    (Mr. Cardan rolled out these words with a particular sonority)
    que par le passé. Cette hypocrisie, le caractère de notre temps a
    gangrené la galanterie.” How sharp that is,’ said Mr. Cardan,
    ‘how wide and how deep! Only I can’t agree with the sentiment
    expressed in the last sentence. For if, as he says, hypocrisy puts
    more ardour into the practice of love and more “rage in the chutes,”
    then it cannot be said to have gangrened gallantry. It has improved
    it, revivified it, made it interesting. Nineteenth-century hypocrisy
    was a concomitant of nineteenth-century literary romanticism: an
    inevitable reaction, like that, against the excessive classicism of
    the eighteenth century. Classicism in literature is intolerable
    because there are too many restrictive rules; it is intolerable in
    love because there are too few. They have this in common,
    despite their apparent unlikeness, that they are both matter-of-fact
    and unemotional. It is only by inventing rules about it which
    can be broken, it is only by investing it with an almost supernatural
    importance, that love can be made interesting. Angels, philosophers
    and demons must haunt the alcove; otherwise it is no place for
    intelligent men and women. No such personages were to be found
    there in classical times; still less in the neo-classic. The whole
    process was as straightforward, prosaic, quotidian, and <span class='it'>terre à
    terre</span> as it could be. It must really have become very little more
    interesting than eating dinner—not that I disparage that, mind you,
    particularly nowadays; but in my youth’—Mr. Cardan sighed—‘I
    set less stock in those days by good food. Still, even now, I have
    to admit, there’s not much excitement, not much poetry in eating.
    It is, I suppose, only in countries where powerful taboos about
    food prevail that the satisfaction of hunger takes on a romantic aspect.
    I can imagine that a strictly-brought-up Jew in the time of Samuel
    might sometimes have been seized by almost irresistible temptations
    to eat a lobster or some similar animal that divides the hoof but does
    not chew the cud. I can imagine him pretending to his wife that
    he was going to the synagogue; but in reality he slinks surreptitiously
    away down a sinister alley to gorge himself illicitly in some
    house of ill fame on pork and lobster mayonnaise. Quite a drama
    there. I give you the notion, gratis, as the subject for a story.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I’m most grateful,’ said Miss Thriplow.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘And then, remember, the next morning, after the most portentous
    dreams all the night through, he’ll wake up tremendously
    strict, a Pharisee of the Pharisees, and he’ll send a subscription to
    the society for the Protection of Public Morals and another to the
    Anti-Lobster League. And he’ll write to the papers saying how
    disgraceful it is that young novelists should be allowed to publish
    books containing revolting descriptions of ham being eaten in
    mixed company, of orgies in oyster shops, with other culinary
    obscenities too horrible to be mentioned. He’ll do all that, won’t
    he, Miss Mary?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Most certainly. And you forgot to say,’ added Miss Thriplow,
    forgetting that she was the head girl in the convent school, ‘that
    he’ll insist more strictly than ever on his daughters being brought
    up in perfect ignorance of the very existence of sausages.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Quite right,’ said Mr. Cardan. ‘All of which was merely
    meant to show how exciting even eating might become if religion
    were brought into it, if dinner were made a mystery and the imagination
    thoroughly stirred every time the gong sounded. Conversely,
    how tedious love becomes when it is taken as matter-of-factly
    as eating dinner. It was essential for the men and women of
    1830, if they didn’t want to die of pure boredom, to invent the
    <span class='it'>pauvre faible femme</span>, the martyr, the angel, the sister of charity,
    to talk like the Bible while they were consummating the devil’s
    work. The sort of love that their predecessors of the eighteenth
    century and the empire had made was too prosaic a business. They
    turned to hypocrisy in mere self-preservation. But the present
    generation, tired of playing at Madame Marneffe, has reverted to
    the empire notions of Baron Hulot.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Emancipation is excellent,
    no doubt, in its way. But in the end it defeats its own object.
    People ask for freedom; but what they finally get turns out to be
    boredom. To those for whom love has become as obvious an
    affair as eating dinner, for whom there are no blushful mysteries,
    no reticences, no fancy-fostering concealments, but only plain
    speaking and the facts of nature—how flat and stale the whole
    business must become! It needs crinolines to excite the imagination
    and dragonish duennas to inflame desire to passion. Too
    much light conversation about the Oedipus complex and anal
    erotism is taking the edge off love. In a few years, I don’t mind
    prophesying, you young people will be whispering to one another
    sublime things about angels, sisters of charity and the infinite.
    You’ll be sheathed in Jaeger and pining behind bars. And love,
    in consequence, will seem incomparably more romantic, more
    alluring than it does in these days of emancipation.’ Mr. Cardan
    spat out the pips of his last grape, pushed the fruit plate away from
    him, leaned back in his chair and looked about him triumphantly.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘How little you understand women,’ said Mrs. Aldwinkle,
    shaking her head. ‘Doesn’t he, Mary?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Some women, at any rate,’ Miss Thriplow agreed. ‘You seem
    to forget, Mr. Cardan, that Diana is quite as real a type as Venus.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Exactly,’ said Mrs. Aldwinkle. ‘You couldn’t have put it
    more succinctly.’ Eighteen years ago, she and Mr. Cardan had
    been lovers. Elzevir, the pianist, had succeeded him—a short
    reign—to be followed by Lord Trunion—or was it Dr. Lecoing?—or
    both? At the moment Mrs. Aldwinkle had forgotten these
    facts. And when she did remember, it was not quite in the way
    that other people—Mr. Cardan, for example—remembered them.
    It was all wonderfully romantic, now; and she had been Diana
    all the time.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘But I entirely agree with you,’ said Mr. Cardan. ‘I unequivocally
    admit the existence of Artemis. I could even prove
    it for you empirically.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘That’s very good of you,’ said Mrs. Aldwinkle, trying to be
    sarcastic.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘The only figure on Olympus whom I have always regarded as
    being purely mythical,’ Mr. Cardan went on, ‘as having no foundation
    in the facts of life, is Athena. A goddess of wisdom—a
    <span class='it'>goddess</span>!’ he repeated with emphasis. ‘Isn’t that a little too
    thick?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Majestically Mrs. Aldwinkle rose from the table. ‘Let us
    go out into the garden,’ she said.</p>

    <h2>CHAPTER IV</h2>

    <p class='pindent'>Mrs. Aldwinkle had even bought the stars.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘How bright they are!’ she exclaimed, as she stepped out at
    the head of her little troop of guests on to the terrace. ‘And how
    they twinkle! How they palpitate! As though they were alive.
    They’re never like this in England, are they, Calamy?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Calamy agreed. Agreeing, he had found, was a labour-saving
    device—positively a necessity in this Ideal Home. He always
    tried to agree with Mrs. Aldwinkle.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘And how clearly one sees the Great Bear!’ Mrs. Aldwinkle
    went on, speaking almost perpendicularly upwards into the height
    of heaven. The Bear and Orion were the only constellations she
    could recognize. ‘Such a strange and beautiful shape, isn’t it?’
    It might almost have been designed by the architect of the Malaspina
    palace.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Very strange,’ said Calamy.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Mrs. Aldwinkle dropped her eyes from the zenith, turned and
    smiled at him, penetratingly, forgetting that in the profound and
    moonless darkness her charm would be entirely wasted.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Miss Thriplow’s voice spoke softly, with a kind of childish
    drawl through the darkness. ‘They might be Italian tenors,’ she
    said, ‘tremoloing away like that so passionately in the sky. No
    wonder, with those stars overhead, no wonder life tends to become
    a bit operatic in this country at times.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Mrs. Aldwinkle was indignant. ‘How can you blaspheme
    like that against the stars?’ she said. Then, remembering that
    she had also bought Italian music, not to mention the habits and
    customs of the whole Italian people, she went on: ‘Besides,
    it’s such a cheap joke about the tenors. After all, this is the
    only country where <span class='it'>bel canto</span> is still .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.’ She waved her hand.
    ‘And you remember how much Wagner admired what’s-his-name.
    .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Bellini,’ prompted the little niece as self-effacingly as possible.
    She had heard her aunt speak of Wagner’s admiration before.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Bellini,’ repeated Mrs. Aldwinkle. ‘Besides, life isn’t operatic
    in Italy. It’s genuinely passionate.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Miss Thriplow was, for a moment, rather at a loss for an answer.
    She had a faculty for making these little jokes; but at the same time
    she was so very much afraid that people might regard her as merely
    clever and unfeeling, a hard and glittering young woman. Half a
    dozen smart repartees were possible, of course; but then she
    mustn’t forget that she was fundamentally so simple, so Wordsworthian,
    such a violet by a mossy stone—particularly this evening,
    in her shawl.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>However much we should like to do so, however highly, in
    private, we think of our abilities, we generally feel that it is bad
    form to boast of our intelligence. But in regard to our qualities
    of heart we feel no such shame; we talk freely of our kindness,
    bordering on weakness, of our generosity carried almost to the
    point of folly (tempering our boasting a little by making out that
    our qualities are so excessive as to be defects). Miss Thriplow,
    however, was one of those rare people so obviously and admittedly
    clever that there could be no objection to her mentioning the fact
    as often as she liked; people would have called it only justifiable
    self-esteem. But Miss Thriplow, perversely, did not want to be
    praised or to praise herself for her intelligence. She was chiefly
    anxious to make the world appreciative of her heart. When, as
    on this occasion, she followed her natural bent towards smartness
    too far, or when, carried away by the desire to make herself agreeable
    in flashing company, she found herself saying something
    whose brilliance was not in harmony with the possession of simple
    and entirely natural emotions, she would recollect herself and
    hastily try to correct the misapprehension she had created among
    her hearers. Now, therefore, at the end of a moment’s lightning
    meditation, she managed to think of a remark which admirably
    combined, she flattered herself, the most genuine feeling for Nature
    with an elegantly recondite allusion—this last for the benefit
    particularly of Mr. Cardan, who as a scholarly gentleman of the
    old school was a great appreciator and admirer of learning.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Yes, Bellini,’ she said rapturously, picking up the reference
    from the middle of Mrs. Aldwinkle’s last sentence. ‘What a
    wonderful gift of melody! <span class='it'>Casta diva</span>—do you remember that?’
    And in a thin voice she sang the first long phrase. ‘What a lovely
    line the melody traces out! Like the line of those hills against
    the sky.’ She pointed.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>On the further side of the valley to westward of the promontory
    of hill on which the palace stood, projected a longer and higher
    headland. From the terrace one looked up at its huge impending
    mass.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. It was at this that Miss Thriplow now pointed. With
    her forefinger she followed the scalloped and undulating outline
    of its silhouette.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Even Nature, in Italy, is like a work of art,’ she added.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Mrs. Aldwinkle was mollified. ‘That’s very true,’ she said;
    and stepping out, she began the evening’s promenading along the
    terrace. The train of her velvet robe rustled after her over the
    dusty flagstones. Mrs. Aldwinkle didn’t mind in the least if it
    got dirty. It was the general effect that mattered; stains, dust,
    clinging twigs and millepedes—those were mere details. She
    treated her clothes, in consequence, with a fine aristocratic carelessness.
    The little troop followed her.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>There was no moon; only stars in a dark blue firmament. Black
    and flat against the sky, the Herculeses and the bowed Atlases, the
    kilted Dianas and the Venuses who concealed their charms with a
    two-handed gesture of alluring modesty, stood, like as many petrified
    dancers, on the piers of the balustrade. The stars looked between
    them. Below, in the blackness of the plain, burned constellations
    of yellow lights. Unremittingly, the croaking of frogs came up,
    thin, remote, but very clear, from invisible waters.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Nights like this,’ said Mrs. Aldwinkle, halting and addressing
    herself with intensity to Calamy, ‘make one understand the passion
    of the South.’ She had an alarming habit, when she spoke to
    any one at all intimately or seriously, of approaching her face very
    close to that of her interlocutor, opening her eyes to their fullest
    extent and staring for a moment with the fixed penetrating stare
    of an oculist examining his patient.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Like trucks at the tail of a suddenly braked locomotive, Mrs. Aldwinkle’s
    guests came joltingly to a stop when she stopped.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Calamy nodded. ‘Quite,’ he said, ‘quite.’ Even in this
    faint starlight, he noticed, Mrs. Aldwinkle’s eyes glittered alarmingly
    as she approached her face to his.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘In this horrible bourgeois age’—Mrs. Aldwinkle’s vocabulary
    (like Mr. Falx’s, though for different reasons) contained no
    word of bitterer disparagement than ‘bourgeois’—‘it’s only
    Southern people who still understand or even, I believe, feel passion.’
    Mrs. Aldwinkle believed in passion, passionately.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>From behind the glowing red end of his cigar Mr. Cardan began
    to speak. In the darkness his voice sounded more than ever ripe
    and fruity. ‘You’re quite right,’ he assured Mrs. Aldwinkle,
    ‘quite right. It’s the climate, of course. The warmth has a
    double effect on the inhabitants, direct and indirect. The direct
    effect needs no explaining; warmth calls to warmth. It’s obvious.
    But the indirect is fully as important. In a hot country one doesn’t
    care to work too hard. One works enough to keep oneself alive
    (and it’s tolerably easy to keep alive under these stars), and one
    cultivates long leisures. Now it’s sufficiently obvious that practically
    the only thing that anybody who is not a philosopher can do
    in his leisure is to make love. No serious-minded, hard-working
    man has the time, the spare energy or the inclination to abandon
    himself to passion. Passion can only flourish among the well-fed
    unemployed. Consequently, except among women and men of
    the leisured class, passion in all its luxuriant intricacy hardly exists
    in the hard-working North. It is only among those whose desires
    and whose native idleness are fostered by the cherishing Southern
    heat that it has flourished and continues to flourish, as you rightly
    point out, my dear Lilian, even in this burgess age.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Mr. Cardan had hardly begun to speak before Mrs. Aldwinkle
    indignantly moved on again. He outraged all her
    feelings.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Mr. Cardan talking all the way, they passed the silhouettes of
    modest Venus, of Diana and her attendant dog, of Hercules leaning
    on his club and Atlas bending under the weight of his globe, of
    Bacchus lifting to heaven the stump of a broken arm whose hand
    had once held the wine cup. Arrived at the end of the terrace,
    they turned and walked back again past the same row of
    symbols.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘It’s easy to talk like that,’ said Mrs. Aldwinkle, when he had
    finished. ‘But it doesn’t make any difference to the grandeur
    of passion, to its purity and beauty and .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.’ She faded out
    breathlessly.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Wasn’t it Bossuet,’ asked Irene timidly, but with determination,
    for she felt that she owed it to Aunt Lilian to intervene; and
    besides, Aunt Lilian liked her to take part in the conversation,
    ‘wasn’t it Bossuet who said that there was something of the Infinite
    in passion?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Splendid, Irene,’ Mr. Cardan cried encouragingly.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Irene blushed in the concealing darkness. ‘But I think Bossuet’s
    quite right,’ she declared. She could become a lioness, in spite
    of her blushes, when it was a question of supporting Aunt Lilian.
    ‘I think he’s absolutely right,’ she confirmed, after a moment of
    recollection, out of her own experience. She herself had felt
    most infinitely, more than once—for Irene had run through a
    surprising number of passions in her time. ‘I can’t think,’ her
    Aunt Lilian used to say to her, when Irene came in the evenings to
    brush her hair before she went to bed, ‘I can’t think how it is that
    you’re not wildly in love with Peter—or Jacques—or Mario.’
    (The name might change as Mrs. Aldwinkle and her niece moved
    in their seasonal wanderings, backwards and forwards across the
    map of Europe; but, after all, what’s in a name?) ‘If I were
    your age I should be quite bowled over by him.’ And thinking
    more seriously now of Peter, or Jacques, or Mario, Irene would
    discover that Aunt Lilian was quite right; the young man was
    indeed a very remarkable young man. And for the remainder of
    their stay at the Continental, the Bristol, the Savoia, she would be
    in love—passionately. What she had felt on these occasions was
    decidedly infinite. Bossuet, there was no doubt of it, knew what
    he was talking about.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Well, if <span class='it'>you</span> think he’s right, Irene,’ said Mr. Cardan, ‘why
    then, there’s nothing for me to do but retire from the argument.
    I bow before superior authority.’ He took the cigar out of his
    mouth and bowed.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Irene felt herself blushing once more. ‘Now you’re making
    fun of me,’ she said.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Mrs. Aldwinkle put her arm protectively round the young girl’s
    shoulders. ‘I won’t let you tease her, Cardan,’ she said. ‘She’s
    the only one of you all who has a real feeling for what is noble
    and fine and grand.’ She drew Irene closer to her, pressed her
    in a sidelong and peripatetic embrace. Happily, devotedly, Irene
    abandoned herself. Aunt Lilian was wonderful!</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Oh, I know,’ said Mr. Cardan apologetically, ‘that I’m nothing
    but an old capripede.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Meanwhile Lord Hovenden, humming loudly and walking a little
    apart from the rest of the company, was making it clear, he hoped,
    to every one that he was occupied with his own thoughts and had
    not heard anything that had been said for the last five minutes.
    What had been said disturbed him none the less. How did Irene
    know so much about passion, he wondered? Had there been,
    could there still be .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. other people? Painfully and persistently
    the question asked itself. With the idea of dissociating himself
    still more completely from all that had been said, he addressed
    himself to Mr. Falx.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Tell me, Mr. Falx,’ he said in a pensive voice, as though he
    had been thinking about the subject for some time before he spoke,
    ‘what do you think of the Fascist Trades Unions?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Mr. Falx told him.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Passion, Calamy was thinking, passion.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. One could have
    enough of it, good Lord! He sighed. If one could say: Never
    again, and be sure of meaning what one said, it would be a great
    comfort. Still, he reflected, there was something rather perversely
    attractive about this Thriplow woman.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Miss Thriplow meanwhile would have liked to say something
    showing that she too believed in passion—but in a passion of a
    rather different brand from Mrs. Aldwinkle’s; in a natural,
    spontaneous and almost childish kind of passion, not the hot-house
    growth that flourishes in drawing-rooms. Cardan was right in
    not thinking very seriously of that. But he could hardly be
    expected to know much about the simple and dewy loves that she
    had in mind. Nor Mrs. Aldwinkle, for that matter. She herself
    understood them perfectly. On second thoughts, however,
    Miss Thriplow decided that they were too tenuous and delicate—these
    gossamer passions of hers—to be talked of here, in the
    midst of unsympathetic listeners.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Casually, as she passed, she plucked a leaf from one of the overhanging
    trees. Absent-mindedly she crushed it between her
    fingers. From the bruised leaf a fragrance mounted to her nostrils.
    She lifted her hand towards her face, she sniffed, once, again.
    And suddenly she was back in the barber’s shop at Weltringham,
    waiting there while her cousin Jim had his hair cut. Mr. Chigwell,
    the barber, had just finished with the revolving brush. The shaft
    of the machine was still turning, the elastic driving band went
    round and round over the wheel, writhing from side to side as it
    went round, like a dying snake suspended, dangerously, above
    Jim’s cropped head.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘A little brilliantine, Mr. Thriplow? Hair’s rather dry, you
    know, rather dry, I’m afraid. Or the usual bay rum?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Bay rum,’ said Jim in the gruffest, most grown-up voice he
    could get out of his chest.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>And Mr. Chigwell would pick up a vaporizer and squirt Jim’s
    hair with clouds made out of a clear brown liquid. And the air
    in the shop was filled with a fragrance which was the fragrance of
    this leaf, this leaf from Apollo’s tree, that she held in her hand.
    It all happened years ago and Jim was dead. They had loved one
    another childishly, with that profound and delicate passion of which
    she could not speak—not here, not now.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>The others went on talking. Miss Thriplow sniffed at her
    crushed bay leaf and thought of her girlhood, of the cousin who had
    died. Darling, darling Jim, she said to herself; darling Jim!
    Again and again. How much she had loved him, how terribly
    unhappy she had been when he died. And she still suffered; still,
    after all these years. Miss Thriplow sighed. She was proud of
    being able to suffer so much; she encouraged her suffering. This
    sudden recollection of Jim, when he was a little boy, in the barber’s
    shop, this vivid remembrance conjured up by the smell of a crushed
    leaf, was a sign of her exquisite sensibility. Mingled with her
    grief there was a certain sense of satisfaction. After all, this had
    happened quite by itself, of its own accord, and spontaneously.
    She had always told people that she was sensitive, had a deep and
    quivering heart. This was a proof. Nobody knew how much
    she suffered, underneath. How could people guess what lay
    behind her gaiety? ‘The more sensitive one is,’ she used to tell
    herself, ‘the more timid and spiritually chaste, the more necessary
    it is for one to wear a mask.’ Her laughter, her little railleries
    were the mask that hid from the outside world what was in her
    soul; they were her armour against a probing and wounding
    curiosity. How could they guess, for example, what Jim had
    meant to her, what he still meant—after all these years? How
    could they imagine that there was a little holy of holies in her heart
    where she still held communion with him? Darling Jim, she said
    to herself, darling, darling Jim. The tears came into her eyes.
    With a finger that still smelt of crushed bay leaves she brushed
    them away.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>It suddenly occurred to her that this would make a splendid
    short story. There would be a young man and a young girl
    walking like this under the stars—the huge Italian stars, tremoloing
    away like tenors (she would remember to bring that into the
    description) overhead in the velvet sky. Their conversation edges
    nearer and nearer to the theme of love. He’s rather a timid
    young man. (His name, Miss Thriplow decided, would be
    Belamy.) One of those charming young men who adore at long
    range, feel that the girl’s too good for them, daren’t hope that she
    might stoop from her divinity, and all that. He’s afraid of saying
    definitely that he loves her for fear of being ignominiously rejected.
    She, of course, likes him most awfully and her name is Edna.
    Such a delicate, sensitive creature; his gentleness and diffidence
    are the qualities in him that particularly charm her.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>The conversation gets nearer and nearer to love; the stars
    palpitate more and more ecstatically. Edna picks a leaf from the
    fragrant laurel as she passes. ‘What must be so wonderful about
    love,’ the young man is just saying (it’s a set speech and he’s been
    screwing up his courage to get it out for the last half-hour), ‘about
    real love, I mean, is the complete understanding, the fusion of
    spirits, the ceasing to be oneself and the becoming some one else,
    the .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.’ But sniffing at the crushed leaf, she suddenly cries out,
    uncontrollably (impulsiveness is one of Edna’s charms), ‘Why,
    it’s the barber’s shop at Weltringham! Funny little Mr. Chigwell
    with the squint! And the rubber band still going round and round
    over the wheel, wriggling like a snake.’ But the poor young man,
    poor Belamy, is most dreadfully upset. If that’s the way she’s
    going to respond when he talks about love, he may as well be silent.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>There’s a long pause; then he begins talking about Karl Marx.
    And of course she somehow can’t explain—it’s a psychological
    impossibility—that the barber’s shop at Weltringham is a symbol
    of her childhood and that the smell of the crushed laurel leaf brought
    back her dead brother—in the story it would be a brother—to her.
    She simply can’t explain that her apparently heartless interruption
    was prompted by a sudden anguish of recollection. She longs to,
    but somehow she can’t bring herself to begin. It’s too difficult
    and too elusive to be talked about, and when one’s heart is so
    sensitive, how can one uncover it, how can one probe the wound?
    And besides, he ought somehow to have guessed, he ought to have
    loved her enough to understand; she has her pride too. Every
    second she delays, the explanation becomes more impossible. In
    a flat, miserable voice he goes on talking about Karl Marx. And
    suddenly, unrestrainedly, she begins sobbing and laughing at the
    same time.</p>

    <h2>CHAPTER V</h2>

    <p class='pindent'>The black silhouette that on the terrace had so perfunctorily
    symbolized Mr. Cardan transformed itself as he entered the lamp-lit
    saloon into the complete and genial man. His red face twinkled
    in the light; he was smiling.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I know Lilian,’ he was saying. ‘She’ll sit out there under the
    stars, feeling romantic and getting colder and colder, for hours.
    There’s nothing to be done, I assure you. To-morrow she’ll have
    rheumatism. We can only resign ourselves and try to bear her
    sufferings in patience.’ He sat down in an arm-chair in front of
    the enormous empty hearth. ‘That’s better,’ he said, sighing.
    Calamy and Miss Thriplow followed his example.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘But don’t you think I’d better bring her a shawl?’ suggested
    Miss Thriplow after a pause.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘She’d only be annoyed,’ Mr. Cardan answered. ‘If Lilian has
    said that it’s warm enough to sit out of doors, then it <span class='it'>is</span> warm
    enough. We’ve already proved ourselves fools by wanting to go
    indoors; if we brought her a shawl, we should become something
    worse than fools: we should be rude and impertinent, we should be
    giving her the lie. “My dear Lilian,” we’d be as good as saying,
    “it isn’t warm. And when you say that it is, you’re talking nonsense.
    So we have brought you your shawl.” No, no, Miss
    Mary. You must surely see yourself that it wouldn’t do.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Miss Thriplow nodded. ‘How diplomatic!’ she said
    ‘You’re obviously right. We’re all children compared to you,
    Mr. Cardan. Only so high,’ she added irrelevantly—but it was
    all in the childish part—reaching down her hand to within a foot
    or two of the floor. Childishly she smiled at him.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Only <span class='it'>so</span>,’ said Mr. Cardan ironically; and lifting his right hand
    to the level of his eyes, he measured between his thumb and forefinger
    a space of perhaps half an inch. With his winking eye he peeped
    at her through the gap. ‘I’ve seen children,’ he went on, ‘compared
    to whom Miss Mary Thriplow would be .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.’ He threw
    up his hands and let them fall with a clap on to his thighs, leaving
    the sentence to conclude itself in the pregnant silence.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Miss Thriplow resented this denial of her child-like simplicity.
    Of such is the Kingdom of Heaven. But circumstances did not
    permit her to insist on the fact too categorically in Mr. Cardan’s
    presence. The history of their friendship was a little unfortunate.
    At their first meeting, Mr. Cardan, summing her up at a glance
    (wrongly, Miss Thriplow insisted), had taken her into a kind of
    cynical and diabolic confidence, treating her as though she were a
    wholly ‘modern’ and unprejudiced young woman, one of those
    young women who not only <span class='it'>do</span> what they like (which is nothing;
    for the demurest and the most ‘old-fashioned’ can and do act), but
    who also airily and openly talk of their diversions. Inspired by her
    desire to please, and carried away by her facility for adapting herself
    to her spiritual environment, Miss Thriplow had gaily entered into
    the part assigned to her. How brilliant she had been, how charmingly
    and wickedly daring! until finally, twinkling benevolently all
    the time, Mr. Cardan had led the conversation along such strange
    and such outrageous paths that Miss Thriplow began to fear that she
    had put herself in a false position. Goodness only knew what
    mightn’t, with such a man, happen next. By imperceptible degrees
    Miss Thriplow transformed herself from a salamander, sporting
    gaily among the flames, into a primrose by the river’s brim. Henceforward,
    whenever she talked to Mr. Cardan, the serious young
    female novelist—so cultured and intelligent, but so unspoiled—put
    in an appearance. For his part, with that tact which distinguished
    him in all his social negotiations, Mr. Cardan accepted the female
    novelist without showing the least astonishment at the change.
    At most, he permitted himself from time to time to look at her
    through his winking eye and smile significantly. Miss Thriplow
    on these occasions pretended not to notice. In the circumstances,
    it was the best thing she could do.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘People always seem to imagine,’ said Miss Thriplow with a
    martyr’s sigh, ‘that being educated means being sophisticated.
    And what’s more, they never seem to be able to give one credit for
    having a good heart as well as a good head.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>And she had <span class='it'>such</span> a good heart. Any one can be clever, she used
    to say. But what matters is being kind and good, and having nice
    feelings. She felt more than ever pleased about that bay-leaf
    incident. That was having nice feelings.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘They always seem entirely to misunderstand what one writes,’
    Miss Thriplow went on. ‘They like my books because they’re
    smart and unexpected and rather paradoxical and cynical and
    elegantly brutal. They don’t see how serious it all is. They don’t
    see the tragedy and the tenderness underneath. You see,’ she
    explained, ‘I’m trying to do something new—a chemical compound
    of all the categories. Lightness and tragedy and loveliness and wit
    and fantasy and realism and irony and sentiment all combined.
    People seem to find it merely amusing, that’s all.’ She threw out
    her hands despairingly.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘It’s only to be expected,’ said Mr. Cardan comfortingly. ‘Any
    one who has anything to say can’t fail to be misunderstood. The
    public only understands the things with which it is perfectly familiar.
    Something new makes it lose its orientation. And then think of the
    misunderstandings between even intelligent people, people who
    know one another personally. Have you ever corresponded with
    a distant lover?’ Miss Thriplow slightly nodded; she was
    familiar, professionally, with every painful experience. ‘Then you
    must know how easy it is for your correspondent to take the expression
    of one of your passing moods—forgotten long before the arrival
    of the letter at its destination—as your permanent spiritual condition.
    Haven’t you been shocked to receive, by the returning post,
    a letter rejoicing with you in your gaiety, when in fact, at the
    moment, you are plunged in gloom; or astonished, when you come
    whistling down to breakfast, to find beside your plate sixteen pages
    of sympathy and consolation? And have you ever had the misfortune
    to be loved by somebody you do not love? Then you know
    very well how expressions of affection which must have been
    written with tears in the eyes and from the depth of the heart seem
    to you not merely silly and irritating, but in the worst possible bad
    taste. Positively vulgar, like those deplorable letters that are read
    in the divorce courts. And yet these are precisely the expressions
    that you habitually use when writing to the person you yourself
    are in love with. In the same way, the reader of a book who
    happens to be out of tune with the author’s prevailing mood will
    be bored to death by the things that were written with the greatest
    enthusiasm. Or else, like the far-away correspondent, he may
    seize on something which for you was not essential, to make of it
    the core and kernel of the whole book. And then, you admitted
    it yourself, you make it very hard for your readers. You write
    sentimental tragedies in terms of satire and they see only the satire.
    Isn’t it to be expected?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘There’s something in that, of course,’ said Miss Thriplow.
    But not everything, she added to herself.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘And then you must remember,’ Mr. Cardan went on, ‘that
    most readers don’t really read. When you reflect that the pages
    which cost a week of unremitting and agonizing labour to write are
    casually read through—or, more likely, skipped through—in a few
    minutes, you cannot be surprised if little misunderstandings between
    author and reader should happen from time to time. We all read
    too much nowadays to be able to read properly. We read with the
    eyes alone, not with the imagination; we don’t take the trouble to
    reconvert the printed word into a living image. And we do this,
    I may say, in sheer self-defence. For though we read an enormous
    number of words, nine hundred and ninety out of every thousand
    of them are not worth reading properly, are not even susceptible of
    being read except superficially, with the eye alone. Our perfunctory
    reading of nonsense habituates us to be careless and remiss
    with all our reading, even of good books. You may take endless
    pains with your writing, my dear Miss Mary; but out of every
    hundred of your readers, how many, do you suppose, ever take the
    pains to read what you write—and when I say read,’ Mr. Cardan
    added, ‘I mean really <span class='it'>read</span>—how many, I repeat?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Who knows?’ said Miss Thriplow. But even if they did
    read properly, she was thinking, would they really unearth that
    Heart? That was the vital question.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘It’s this mania for keeping up to date,’ said Mr. Cardan, ‘that
    has killed the art of reading. Most of the people I know read three
    or four daily newspapers, look at half a dozen weeklies between
    Saturday and Monday, and a dozen reviews at the end of every
    month. And the rest of the time, as the Bible with justifiable
    vigour would put it, the rest of the time they are whoring after new
    fiction, new plays and verses and biographies. They’ve no time
    to do anything but skim along uncomprehendingly. If you must
    complicate the matter by writing tragedy in terms of farce you can
    only expect confusion. Books have their destinies like men. And
    their fates, as made by generations of readers, are very different
    from the destinies foreseen for them by their authors. <span class='it'>Gulliver’s
    Travels</span>, with a minimum of expurgation, has become a children’s
    book; a new illustrated edition is produced every Christmas.
    That’s what comes of saying profound things about humanity in
    terms of a fairy story. The publications of the Purity League figure
    invariably under the heading “Curious” in the booksellers’ catalogues.
    The theological and, to Milton himself, the fundamental
    and essential part of <span class='it'>Paradise Lost</span> is now so ludicrous that we ignore
    it altogether. When somebody speaks of Milton, what do we call
    to mind? A great religious poet? No. Milton means for us a
    collection of isolated passages, full of bright light, colour and
    thunderous harmony, hanging like musical stars in the lap of
    nothing. Sometimes the adult masterpieces of one generation become
    the reading of schoolboys in the next. Does any one over
    sixteen now read the poems of Sir Walter Scott? or his novels, for
    that matter? How many books of piety and morality survive only
    for their fine writing! and how our interest in the merely aesthetic
    qualities of these books would have scandalized their authors! No,
    at the end of the account it is the readers who make the book what
    it ultimately is. The writer proposes, the readers dispose. It’s
    inevitable, Miss Mary. You must reconcile yourself to fate.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I suppose I must,’ said Miss Thriplow.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Calamy broke silence for the first time since they had entered
    the room. ‘But I don’t know why you complain of being misunderstood,’
    he said, smiling. ‘I should have thought that it was
    much more disagreeable to be understood. One can get annoyed
    with imbeciles for failing to understand what seems obvious to oneself;
    one’s vanity may be hurt by their interpretation of you—they
    make you out to be as vulgar as themselves. Or you may feel that
    you have failed as an artist, in so far as you haven’t managed to make
    yourself transparently plain. But what are all these compared to
    the horrors of being understood—completely understood? You’ve
    given yourself away, you’re known, you’re at the mercy of the
    creatures into whose keeping you have committed your soul—why,
    the thought’s terrifying. If I were you,’ he went on, ‘I’d congratulate
    myself. You have a public which likes your books, but
    for the wrong reasons. And meanwhile you’re safe, you’re out
    of their reach, you possess yourself intact.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Perhaps you’re right,’ said Miss Thriplow. Mr. Cardan
    understood her, she reflected, or at least understood part of her—an
    unreal, superficial part, it was true; but still, she had to admit,
    a part. And it certainly wasn’t agreeable.</p>

    <h2>CHAPTER VI</h2>

    <p class='pindent'>To be torn between divided allegiances is the painful fate of
    almost every human being. Pull devil, pull baker; pull flesh, pull
    spirit; pull love, pull duty; pull reason and pull hallowed prejudice.
    The conflict, in its various forms, is the theme of every
    drama. For though we have learnt to feel disgust at the spectacle
    of a bull-fight, an execution or a gladiatorial show, we still look on
    with pleasure at the contortions of those who suffer spiritual anguish.
    At some distant future date, when society is organized in a rational
    manner so that every individual occupies the position and does the
    work for which his capacities really fit him, when education has
    ceased to instil into the minds of the young fantastic prejudices
    instead of truths, when the endocrine glands have been taught to
    function in perfect harmony and diseases have been suppressed,
    all our literature of conflict and unhappiness will seem strangely
    incomprehensible; and our taste for the spectacle of mental torture
    will be regarded as an obscene perversion of which decent men
    should feel ashamed. Joy will take the place of suffering as the
    principal theme of art; in the process, it may be, art will cease to
    exist. A happy people, we now say, has no history; and we might
    add that happy individuals have no literature. The novelist
    dismisses in a paragraph his hero’s twenty years of happiness; over
    a week of misery and spiritual debate he will linger through twenty
    chapters. When there is no more misery, he will have nothing
    to write about. Perhaps it will be all for the best.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>The conflict which had raged during the last few months within
    Irene’s spirit, though not so serious as some of the inward battles
    that have distracted strong men in their search for the salvation of
    integrity, was still for her a painful one. Put baldly in its most
    concrete form, the question at issue was this: should she paint
    pictures and write? or should she make her own underclothing?</p>

    <p class='pindent'>But for Aunt Lilian the conflict would never have become
    serious; indeed, it would never, in all probability, have begun at
    all. For if it had not been for Aunt Lilian, the Natural Woman in
    Irene would have remained undisputed mistress of the field, and she
    would have passed her days in a placid contentment over the lacy
    intricacies of her undergarments. Aunt Lilian, however, was on
    the side of the Unnatural Woman; it was she who had practically
    called the writer and the painter of pictures into existence, had invented
    Irene’s higher talents and ranged them against the homelier.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Mrs. Aldwinkle’s enthusiasm for the arts was such that she
    wanted every one to practise one or other of them. It was her own
    greatest regret that she herself had no aptitude for any of them.
    Nature had endowed her with no power of self-expression; even in
    ordinary conversation she found it difficult to give utterance to
    what she wanted to say. Her letters were made up of the fragments
    of sentences; it was as though her thoughts had been blown to ungrammatical
    pieces by a bomb and scattered themselves on the page.
    A curious clumsiness of hand united with her native impatience to
    prevent her from drawing correctly or even doing plain sewing.
    And though she listened to music with an expression of rapture, she
    had an ear that could not distinguish a major from a minor third.
    ‘I’m one of those unfortunate people,’ she used to say, ‘who have
    an artistic temperament without an artist’s powers.’ She had to
    content herself with cultivating her own temperament and developing
    other people’s capacities. She never met a young person of
    either sex without encouraging him or her to become a painter, a
    novelist, a poet or a musician. It was she who had persuaded Irene
    that her little dexterity with camel’s-hair brushes was a talent and
    that she ought on the strength of her amusing letters to write lyrics.
    ‘How can you spend your time so stupidly and frivolously?’ she
    used to ask, whenever she found Irene busy at her underlinen. And
    Irene, who adored her Aunt Lilian with the dog-like devotion that
    is only possible when one is eighteen, and rather young for one’s age
    at that, put her sewing away and devoted all her energy to portraying
    in water-colours and describing in rhyme the landscape and the
    flowers of the garden. But the underclothing remained, none the
    less, a permanent temptation. She found herself wondering
    whether her chain-stitch wasn’t better than her painting, her
    button-holing superior to her verse. She asked herself whether
    nightdresses weren’t more useful than water-colours. More useful—and
    besides she was so awfully particular about what she wore
    next her skin; and she adored pretty things. So did Aunt Lilian,
    who used to laugh at her when she wore ugly, dowdy ones. At the
    same time Aunt Lilian didn’t give her much of an allowance. For
    thirty shillings Irene could make a garment that it would have cost
    her five or six guineas to buy in a shop.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Underclothing became for Irene the flesh, became illicit love
    and rebellious reason; poetry and water-colour painting, invested
    by her adoration of Aunt Lilian with a quality of sacredness,
    became spirit, duty and religion. The struggle between her
    inclination and what Aunt Lilian considered good was prolonged
    and distressing.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>On nights like this, however, the Natural Woman faded completely
    out. Under the stars, in the solemn darkness, how could one
    think of underclothing? And Aunt Lilian was being so affectionate.
    Still, it certainly <span class='it'>was</span> rather cool.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Art’s the great thing,’ Mrs. Aldwinkle was saying earnestly,
    ‘the thing that really makes life worth living and justifies one’s
    existence.’ When Mr. Cardan was away she let herself go more
    confidently on her favourite themes.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>And Irene, sitting at her feet, leaning against her knee, couldn’t
    help agreeing. Mrs. Aldwinkle stroked the girl’s soft hair, or
    with combing fingers disordered its sleek surface. Irene shut
    her eyes; happily, drowsily, she listened. Mrs. Aldwinkle’s
    talk came to her in gusts—here a phrase, there a phrase.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Disinterested,’ she was saying, ‘disinterested .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.’ Mrs.
    Aldwinkle had a way, when she wanted to insist on an idea, of
    repeating the same word several times. ‘Disinterested .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.’ It
    saved her the trouble of looking for phrases which she could never
    find, of making explanations which always turned out, at the
    best, rather incoherent. ‘Joy in the work for its own sake.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
    Flaubert spent days over a single sentence.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Wonderful.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Wonderful!’ Irene echoed.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>A little breeze stirred among the bay trees. Their stiff leaves
    rattled dryly together, like scales of metal. Irene shivered a
    little; it was downright cold.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘It’s the only really creative .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.’ Mrs. Aldwinkle couldn’t
    think of the word ‘activity’ and had to content herself with
    making a gesture with her free hand. ‘Through art man comes
    nearest to being a god .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. a god.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>The night wind rattled more loudly among the bay leaves.
    Irene crossed her arms over her chest, hugging herself to keep
    warm. Unfortunately, this boa of flesh and blood was itself
    sensitive. Her frock was sleeveless. The warmth of her bare
    arms drifted off along the wind; the temperature of the surrounding
    atmosphere rose by a hundred-billionth of a degree.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘It’s the highest life,’ said Mrs. Aldwinkle. ‘It’s the only life.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Tenderly she rumpled Irene’s hair. And at this very moment,
    Mr. Falx was meditating, at this very moment, on tram-cars in the
    Argentine, among Peruvian guano-beds, in humming power-stations
    at the foot of African waterfalls, in Australian refrigerators packed
    with slaughtered mutton, in the heat and darkness of Yorkshire
    coal-mines, in tea-plantations on the slopes of the Himalaya, in
    Japanese banks, at the mouth of Mexican oil-wells, in steamers
    walloping along across the China Sea—at this very moment, men
    and women of every race and colour were doing their bit to supply
    Mrs. Aldwinkle with her income. On the two hundred and
    seventy thousand pounds of Mrs. Aldwinkle’s capital the sun never
    set. People worked; Mrs. Aldwinkle led the higher life. She for
    art only, they—albeit unconscious of the privilege—for art in her.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Young Lord Hovenden sighed. If only it were he whose fingers
    were playing in the smooth thick tresses of Irene’s hair! It seemed
    an awful waste that she should be so fond of her Aunt Lilian.
    Somehow, the more he liked Irene the less he liked Aunt Lilian.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Haven’t you sometimes longed to be an artist yourself, Hovenden?’
    Mrs. Aldwinkle suddenly asked. She leaned forward,
    her eyes glittering with the reflected light of two or three hundred
    million remote suns. She was going to suggest that he might try
    his hand at poetical rhapsodies about political injustice and the
    condition of the lower classes. Something half-way between
    Shelley and Walt Whitman.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Me!’ said Hovenden in astonishment. Then he laughed
    aloud: Ha, ha, ha! It was a jarring note.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Mrs. Aldwinkle drew back, pained. ‘I don’t know why you
    should think the idea so impossibly comic,’ she said.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Perhaps he has other work to do,’ said Mr. Falx out of the
    darkness. ‘More important work.’ And at the sound of that
    thrilling, deep, prophetical voice Lord Hovenden felt that, indeed,
    he had.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘More important?’ queried Mrs. Aldwinkle. ‘But can anything
    be more important? When one thinks of Flaubert .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.’ One
    thought of Flaubert—working through all a fifty-four hour week
    at a relative clause. But Mrs. Aldwinkle was too enthusiastic to
    be able to say what followed when one had thought of Flaubert.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Think of coal-miners for a change,’ said Mr. Falx in answer.
    ‘That’s what I suggest.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Yes,’ Lord Hovenden agreed, gravely nodding. A lot of his
    money came from coal. He felt particularly responsible for
    miners when he had time to think of them.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Think,’ said Mr. Falx in his deep voice; and he relapsed into
    a silence more eloquently prophetical than any speech.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>For a long time nobody spoke. The wind came draughtily and
    in ever chillier gusts. Irene clasped her arms still tightlier over
    her breast; she shivered, she yawned with cold. Mrs. Aldwinkle
    felt the shaking of the young body that leaned against her knees.
    She herself was cold too; but after what she had said to Cardan
    and the others it was impossible for her to go indoors yet awhile.
    She felt, in consequence, annoyed with Irene for shivering. ‘Do
    stop,’ she said crossly. ‘It’s only a stupid habit. Like a little
    dog that shivers even in front of the fire.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘All ve same,’ said Lord Hovenden, coming to Irene’s defence,
    ‘it is getting raver cold.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Well, if you find it so,’ retorted Mrs. Aldwinkle, with overwhelming
    sarcasm, ‘you’d better go in and ask them to light a fire.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>It was nearly midnight before Mrs. Aldwinkle finally gave the
    word to go indoors.</p>

    <h2>CHAPTER VII</h2>

    <p class='pindent'>To say good-night definitely and for the last time was a thing
    which Mrs. Aldwinkle found most horribly difficult. With those
    two fatal words she pronounced sentence of death on yet another
    day (on yet another, and the days were so few now, so agonizingly
    brief); she pronounced it also, temporarily at least, on herself.
    For, the formula once finally uttered, there was nothing for her to
    do but creep away out of the light and bury herself in the black
    unconsciousness of sleep. Six hours, eight hours would be stolen
    from her and never given back. And what marvellous things might
    not be happening while she was lying dead between the sheets!
    Extraordinary happinesses might present themselves and, finding
    her asleep and deaf to their calling, pass on. Or some one, perhaps,
    would be saying the one supremely important, revealing, apocalyptic
    thing that she had been waiting all her life to hear. ‘There!’
    she could imagine somebody winding up, ‘that’s the secret of
    the Universe. What a pity poor Lilian should have gone to bed.
    She would have loved to hear it.’ Good-night—it was like
    parting with a shy lover who had not yet ventured to declare
    himself. A minute more and he would speak, would reveal
    himself the unique soul-mate. Good-night, and he would remain
    for ever merely diffident little Mr. Jones. Must she part with
    this day too, before it was transfigured?</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Good-night. Every evening she put off the saying of it as long
    as she possibly could. It was generally half-past one or two before
    she could bring herself to leave the drawing-room. And even then
    the words were not finally spoken. For on the threshold of her
    bed-chamber she would halt, desperately renewing the conversation
    with whichever of her guests had happened to light her upstairs.
    Who knew? Perhaps in these last five minutes, in the intimacy,
    in the nocturnal silence, the important thing really would be said.
    The five minutes often lengthened themselves out to forty, and still
    Mrs. Aldwinkle stood there, desperately putting off and putting off
    the moment when she would have to pronounce the sentence of
    death.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>When there was nobody else to talk to, she had to be content
    with the company of Irene, who always, when she herself had undressed,
    came back in her dressing-gown to help Mrs. Aldwinkle—since
    it would have been unfair to keep a maid up to such late
    hours—make ready for the night. Not that little Irene was
    particularly likely to utter the significant word or think the one
    apocalyptic thought. Though of course one never knew: out
    of the mouths of babes and sucklings .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. And in any case,
    talking with Irene, who was a dear child and so devoted, was
    better than definitely condemning oneself to bed.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>To-night, it was one o’clock before Mrs. Aldwinkle made a move
    towards the door. Miss Thriplow and Mr. Falx, protesting that
    they too were sleepy, accompanied her. And like an attendant
    shadow, Irene silently rose when her aunt rose and silently walked
    after her. Half-way across the room Mrs. Aldwinkle halted and
    turned round. Formidable she was, a tragedy queen in coral-red
    velvet. Her little white muslin mirage halted too. Less patient,
    Mr. Falx and Miss Thriplow moved on towards the door.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘You must all come to bed soon, you know,’ she said, addressing
    herself to the three men who remained at the further end of the
    room in a tone at once imperious and cajoling. ‘I simply won’t
    allow you, Cardan, to keep those poor young men out of their
    beds to all hours of the night. Poor Calamy has been travelling
    all day. And Hovenden needs all the sleep, at his age, that he can
    get.’ Mrs. Aldwinkle took it hardly that any of her guests should
    be awake and talking while she was lying dead in the tomb of sleep.
    ‘<span class='it'>Poor</span> Calamy!’ she pathetically exclaimed, as though it were a
    case of cruelty to animals. She felt herself filled, all at once,
    with an enormous and maternal solicitude for this young man.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Yes, poor Calamy!’ Mr. Cardan repeated, twinkling. ‘Out
    of pure sympathy I was suggesting that we should drink a pint or
    two of red wine before going to bed. There’s nothing like it
    for making one sleep.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Mrs. Aldwinkle turned her bright blue eyes on Calamy, smiled
    her sweetest and most piercing smile. ‘Do come,’ she said.
    ‘Do.’ She extended her hand in a clumsy and inexpressive
    gesture. ‘And you, Hovenden,’ she added, almost despairingly.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Hovenden looked uncomfortably from Mr. Cardan to Calamy,
    hoping that one or other of them would answer for him.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘We shan’t be long,’ said Calamy. ‘The time to drink a glass
    of wine, that’s all. I’m not a bit tired, you know. And Cardan’s
    suggestion of Chianti is very tempting.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Ah well,’ said Mrs. Aldwinkle, ‘if you prefer a glass of
    wine .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.’ She turned away with a sad indignation and rustled
    off towards the door, sweeping the tiled floor with the train of her
    velvet dress. Mr. Falx and Miss Thriplow, who had been lingering
    impatiently near the door, drew back in order that she might
    make her exit in full majesty. With a face that looked very gravely
    out of the little window in her bell of copper hair, Irene followed.
    The door closed behind them.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Calamy turned to Mr. Cardan. ‘If I prefer a glass of wine?’
    he repeated on a note of interrogation. ‘But prefer it to what?
    She made it sound as if I had had to make a momentous and eternal
    choice between her and a pint of Chianti—and had chosen the
    Chianti. It passes my understanding.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Ah, but then you don’t know Lilian as well as I do,’ said
    Mr. Cardan. ‘And now, let’s go and hunt out that flask and
    some glasses in the dining-room.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Half-way up the stairs—they were a grand and solemn flight
    loping gradually upwards under a slanting tunnel of barrel vaulting—Mrs.
    Aldwinkle paused. ‘I always think of them,’ she said
    ecstatically, ‘going up, coming down. Such a spectacle!’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Who?’ asked Mr. Falx.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Those grand old people.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Oh, the tyrants.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Mrs. Aldwinkle smiled pityingly. ‘And the poets, the scholars,
    the philosophers, the painters, the musicians, the beautiful women.
    You forget those, Mr. Falx.’ She raised her hand, as though
    summoning their spirits from the abyss. Psychical eyes might
    have seen a jewelled prince with a nose like an ant-eater’s slowly
    descending between obsequious human hedges. Behind him a
    company of buffoons and little hunch-backed dwarfs, stepping
    cautiously, sidelong, from stair to stair.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I forget nothing,’ said Mr. Falx. ‘But I think tyrants are
    too high a price to pay.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Mrs. Aldwinkle sighed and resumed her climbing. ‘What a
    queer fellow Calamy is, don’t you think?’ she said, addressing
    herself to Miss Thriplow. Mrs. Aldwinkle, who liked discussing
    other people’s characters and who prided herself on her perspicacity
    and her psychological intuition, found almost everybody ‘queer,’
    even, when she thought it worth while discussing her, little Irene.
    She liked to think that every one she knew was tremendously complicated;
    had strange and improbable motives for his simplest
    actions, was moved by huge, dark passions; cultivated secret vices;
    in a word, was larger than life and a good deal more interesting.
    ‘What did you think of him, Mary?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Very intelligent,’ thought Miss Thriplow.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Oh, of course, of course,’ Mrs. Aldwinkle agreed almost impatiently;
    that wasn’t anything much to talk about. ‘But one
    hears odd stories of his amorous tastes, you know.’ The party
    halted at the door of Mrs. Aldwinkle’s room. ‘Perhaps that was
    one of the reasons,’ she went on mysteriously, ‘why he went travelling
    all that time—right away from civilization.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.’ On such a
    theme a conversation might surely be almost indefinitely protracted;
    the moment for uttering the final, fatal good-night had not yet come.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Downstairs in the great saloon the three men were sitting over
    their red wine. Mr. Cardan had already twice refilled his glass.
    Calamy was within sight of the bottom of his first tumbler;
    young Lord Hovenden’s was still more than half full. He was
    not a very accomplished drinker and was afraid of being sick if
    he swallowed too much of this young and generous brew.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Bored, you’re just bored. That’s all it is,’ Mr. Cardan was
    saying. He looked at Calamy over the top of his glass and took
    another sip, as though to his health. ‘You haven’t met any one
    of late who took your fancy; that’s all. Unless, of course, it’s
    a case of catarrh in the bile ducts.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘It’s neither,’ said Calamy, smiling.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Or perhaps it’s the first great climacteric. You don’t happen
    to be thirty-five, I suppose? Five times seven—a most formidable
    age. Though not quite so serious as sixty-three. That’s the
    grand climacteric.’ Mr. Cardan shook his head. ‘Thank the
    Lord, I got past it without dying, or joining the Church of Rome,
    or getting married. Thank the Lord; but you?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I’m thirty-three,’ said Calamy.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘A most harmless time of life. Then it’s just boredom. You’ll
    meet some little ravishment and all the zest will return.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Young Lord Hovenden laughed in a very ventriloquial, man-of-the-worldly
    fashion.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Calamy shook his head. ‘But I don’t really want it to return,
    he said. ‘I don’t want to succumb to any more little ravishments.
    It’s too stupid; it’s too childish. I used to think that there was
    something rather admirable and enviable about being an <span class='it'>homme à
    bonnes fortunes</span>. Don Juan has an honoured place in literature;
    it’s thought only natural that a Casanova should complacently
    boast of his successes. I accepted the current view, and when I
    was lucky in love—and I’ve always been only too deplorably
    fortunate—I used to think the more highly of myself.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘We have all thought the same,’ said Mr. Cardan. ‘The
    weakness is a pardonable one.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Lord Hovenden nodded and took a sip of wine to show that he
    entirely agreed with the last speaker.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Pardonable, no doubt,’ said Calamy. ‘But when one comes to
    think it over, not very reasonable. For, after all, there’s nothing
    really to be very proud of, there’s nothing very much to boast about.
    Consider first of all the other heroes who have had the same sort
    of successes—more notable, very probably, and more numerous
    than one’s own. Consider them. What do you see? Rows of
    insolent grooms and pugilists; leather-faced ruffians and disgusting
    old satyrs; louts with curly hair and no brains, and cunning little
    pimps like weasels; soft-palmed young epicenes and hairy gladiators—a
    vast army composed of the most odious specimens of humanity.
    Is one to be proud of belonging to their numbers?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Why not?’ asked Mr. Cardan. ‘One should always thank
    God for whatever native talents one possesses. If your talent
    happens to lie in the direction of higher mathematics, praise God;
    and if in the direction of seduction, praise God just the same.
    And thanking God, when one comes to examine the process a
    little closely, is very much the same as boasting or being proud.
    I see no harm in boasting a little of one’s Casanovesque capacities.
    You young men are always so damned intolerant. You won’t
    allow any one to go to heaven, or hell, or nowhere, whichever the
    case may be, by any road except the one you happen to approve
    of.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. You should take a leaf out of the Indians’ book. The
    Indians calculate that there are eighty-four thousand different
    types of human beings, each with its own way of getting through
    life. They probably underestimate.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Calamy laughed. ‘I only speak for my type,’ he said.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘And Hovenden and I for ours,’ said Mr. Cardan. ‘Don’t
    we, Hovenden?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Oh yes. Yes, of course,’ Lord Hovenden answered; and
    for some reason he blushed.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Proceed,’ said Mr. Cardan, refilling his glass.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Well then,’ Calamy went on, ‘belonging to the species I do
    belong to, I can’t take much satisfaction in these successes. The
    more so when I consider their nature. For either you’re in love
    with the woman or you aren’t; either you’re carried away by your
    inflamed imagination (for, after all, the person you’re really
    violently in love with is always your own invention and the wildest
    of fancies) or by your senses and your intellectual curiosity. If
    you aren’t in love, it’s a mere experiment in applied physiology,
    with a few psychological investigations thrown in to make it a
    little more interesting. But if you are, it means that you become
    enslaved, involved, dependent on another human being in a way
    that’s positively disgraceful, and the more disgraceful the more
    there is in you to be enslaved and involved.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘It wasn’t Browning’s opinion,’ said Mr. Cardan.</p>

    <div class='poetry-container' style=''><div class='lgp'> <!-- rend=';' -->
    <p class='line0'>‘The woman yonder, there’s no use in life</p>
    <p class='line0'>&ensp;But just to obtain her.’</p>
    </div></div> <!-- end poetry block --><!-- end rend -->

    <p class='pindent'>‘Browning was a fool,’ said Calamy.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>But Lord Hovenden was silently of opinion that Browning
    was quite right. He thought of Irene’s face, looking out of the
    little window in the copper bell.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Browning belonged to another species,’ Mr. Cardan corrected.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘A foolish species, I insist,’ said Calamy.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Well, to tell the truth,’ Mr. Cardan admitted, closing his
    winking eye a little further, ‘I secretly agree with you about that.
    I’m not really as entirely tolerant as I should like to be.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Calamy was frowning pensively over his own affairs, and without
    discussing the greater or less degree of Mr. Cardan’s tolerance
    he went on. ‘The question is, at the end of it all: what’s the
    way out? what’s to be done about it? For it’s obvious, as
    you say, that the little ravishments will turn up again. And appetite
    grows with fasting. And philosophy, which knows very well
    how to deal with past and future temptations, always seems to break
    down before the present, the immediate ones.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Happily,’ said Mr. Cardan. ‘For, when all is said, is there
    a better indoor sport? Be frank with me; <span class='it'>is</span> there?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Possibly not,’ said Calamy, while young Lord Hovenden smiled
    at Mr. Cardan’s last remark, but unenthusiastically, in a rather
    painful indecision between amusement and horror. ‘But the
    point is, aren’t there better occupations for a man of sense than
    indoor sports, even the best of indoor sports?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘No,’ said Mr. Cardan, with decision.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘For you, perhaps, there mayn’t be. But it seems to me,’
    Calamy went on, ‘that I’m beginning to have had enough of
    sports, whether indoor or out-of-door. I’d like to find some
    more serious occupation.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘But that’s easier said than done.’ Mr. Cardan shook his
    head. ‘For members of our species it’s precious hard to find
    any occupation that seems entirely serious. Eh?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Calamy laughed, rather mournfully. ‘That’s true,’ he said.
    ‘But at the same time the sports begin to seem rather an outrage
    on one’s human dignity. Rather immoral, I would say, if the word
    weren’t so absurd.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Not at all absurd, I assure you, when used as you use it.’
    Mr. Cardan twinkled more and more genially over the top of his glass.
    ‘As long as you don’t talk about moral laws and all that sort of thing
    there’s no absurdity. For, it’s obvious, there are no moral laws.
    There are social customs on the one hand, and there are individuals
    with their individual feelings and moral reactions on the other.
    What’s immoral in one man may not matter in another. Almost
    nothing, for example, is immoral for me. Positively, you know, I
    can do anything and yet remain respectable in my own eyes, and in
    the eyes of others not merely wonderfully decent, but even noble.</p>

    <div class='poetry-container' style=''><div class='lgp'> <!-- rend=';' -->
    <p class='line0'>Ah, what avail the loaded dice?</p>
    <p class='line0'>Ah, what the tubs of wine?</p>
    <p class='line0'>What every weakness, every vice?</p>
    <p class='line0'>Tom Cardan, all were thine.</p>
    </div></div> <!-- end poetry block --><!-- end rend -->

    <p class='noindent'>I won’t bore you with the rest of this epitaph which I composed for
    myself some little time ago. Suffice to say that I point out in
    the two subsequent stanzas that these things availed absolutely
    nothing and that, <span class='it'>malgré tout</span>, I remained the honest, sober, pure
    and high-minded man that every one always instinctively recognizes
    me to be.’ Mr. Cardan emptied his glass and reached out once
    more for the fiasco.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘You’re fortunate,’ said Calamy. ‘It’s not all of us whose
    personalities have such a natural odour of sanctity that they can
    disinfect our septic actions and render them morally harmless.
    When I do something stupid or dirty I can’t help feeling that it is
    stupid or dirty. My soul lacks virtues to make it wise or clean.
    And I can’t dissociate myself from what I do. I wish I could.
    One does such a devilish number of stupid things. Things one
    doesn’t want to do. If only one could be a hedonist and only do
    what was pleasant! But to be a hedonist one must be wholly
    rational; there’s no such thing as a genuine hedonist, there never
    has been. Instead of doing what one wants to do or what would
    give one pleasure, one drifts through existence doing exactly the
    opposite, most of the time—doing what one has no desire to do,
    following insane promptings that lead one, fully conscious, into
    every sort of discomfort, misery, boredom and remorse. Sometimes,’
    Calamy went on, sighing, ‘I positively regret the time I
    spent in the army during the war. Then, at any rate, there was no
    question of doing what one liked; there was no liberty, no choice.
    One did what one was told and that was all. Now I’m free;
    I have every opportunity for doing exactly what I like—and I
    consistently do what I don’t like.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘But do you know exactly what you do like?’ asked Mr. Cardan.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Calamy shrugged his shoulders. ‘Not exactly,’ he said. ‘I
    suppose I should say reading, and satisfying my curiosity about
    things, and thinking. But about what, I don’t feel perfectly
    certain. I don’t like running after women, I don’t like wasting
    my time in futile social intercourse, or in the pursuit of what is
    technically known as pleasure. And yet for some reason and quite
    against my will I find myself passing the greater part of my time
    immersed in precisely these occupations. It’s an obscure kind of
    insanity.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Young Lord Hovenden, who knew that he liked dancing and
    desired Irene Aldwinkle more than anything in the world, found
    all this a little incomprehensible. ‘I can’t see what vere is to
    prevent a man from doing what he wants to do. Except,’ he qualified,
    remembering the teaching of Mr. Falx, ‘economic necessity.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘And himself,’ added Mr. Cardan.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘And what’s the most depressing of all,’ Calamy went on,
    without paying attention to the interruption, ‘is the feeling that
    one will go on like this for ever, in the teeth of every effort to
    stop. I sometimes wish I weren’t externally free. For then at
    any rate I should have something to curse at, for getting in my way,
    other than my own self. Yes, positively, I sometimes wish I
    were a navvy.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘You wouldn’t if you had ever been one,’ said Lord Hovenden,
    gravely and with a knowing air of speaking from personal experience.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Calamy laughed. ‘You’re perfectly right,’ he said, and drained
    his glass. ‘Shouldn’t we think of going to bed?’</p>

    <h2>CHAPTER VIII</h2>

    <p class='pindent'>To Irene fell the privilege every evening of brushing her
    aunt’s hair. For her these midnight moments were the most
    precious in the day. True, it was sometimes an agony for her to
    keep awake and the suppression of yawns was always painful;
    three years of incessant practice had not yet accustomed her to her
    Aunt Lilian’s late hours. Aunt Lilian used to twit her sometimes
    on her childish longing for sleep; at other times she used to insist,
    very solicitously, that Irene should rest after lunch and go to bed
    at ten. The teasing made Irene feel ashamed of her babyishness;
    the solicitude made her protest that she wasn’t a baby, that she was
    never tired and could easily do with five or six hours’ sleep a night.
    The important thing, she had found, was not to be seen yawning
    by Aunt Lilian and always to look fresh and lively. If Aunt Lilian
    noticed nothing there was neither teasing nor solicitude.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>But in any case, every inconvenience was paid for a thousand
    times by the delights of these confidential conversations in front
    of the dressing-table mirror. While the young girl brushed and
    brushed away at the long tresses of pale golden-brown hair,
    Mrs. Aldwinkle, her eyes shut, and with an expression of beatitude
    on her face—for she took a cat’s pleasure in the brushing—would
    talk, spasmodically, in broken sentences, of the events of the day,
    of her guests, of the people they had met; or of her own past,
    of plans for the future—hers or Irene’s—of love. On all these
    subjects Mrs. Aldwinkle spoke intimately, confidentially, without
    reserve. Feeling that she was being treated by her Aunt Lilian
    as entirely grown-up and almost as an equal, Irene was proud and
    grateful. Without deliberately setting out to complete the subjugation
    of her niece, Mrs. Aldwinkle had discovered, in those
    midnight conversations, the most perfect means for achieving this
    end. If she talked like this to Irene, it was merely because she
    felt the need of talking intimately to some one, and because there
    was nobody else to talk to. Incidentally, however, she had
    contrived in the process to make the girl her slave. Made her
    Aunt Lilian’s confidante, invested, so to speak, with a title of honour,
    Irene felt a gratitude which strengthened her original childish
    attachment to her aunt.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Meanwhile, she had learned to talk with an airy familiarity
    of many things concerning which young girls are supposed to be
    ignorant, and of which, indeed, she herself knew, except intellectually
    and at second hand, nothing. She had learned to be knowing
    and worldly wise, in the void, so to speak, and with no personal
    knowledge of the world. Gravely, ingenuously, she would say
    things that could only be uttered out of the depths of the profoundest
    innocence, amplifying and making embarrassingly explicit
    in public things that Mrs. Aldwinkle had only fragmentarily hinted
    at in the confidential small hours. She regarded herself as immensely
    mature.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>To-night Mrs. Aldwinkle was in a rather gloomy, complaining
    mood.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I’m getting old,’ she said, sighing, and opening her eyes for
    a moment to look at her image in the glass that confronted her.
    The image did not deny the statement. ‘And yet I always feel
    so young.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘That’s what really matters,’ Irene declared. ‘And besides,
    it’s nonsense; you’re not old; you don’t look old.’ In Irene’s
    eyes, moreover, she really didn’t look old.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘People don’t like one any more when one gets old,’ Mrs. Aldwinkle
    continued. ‘Friends are terribly faithless. They fall
    away.’ She sighed. ‘When I think of all the friends .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.’
    She left the sentence unfinished.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>All her life long Mrs. Aldwinkle had had a peculiar genius for
    breaking with her friends and lovers. Mr. Cardan was almost
    the sole survivor from an earlier generation of friends. From all
    the rest she had parted, and she had parted with a light heart. It
    had seemed easy to her, when she was younger, to make new friends
    in place of the old. Potential friends, she thought, were to be
    found everywhere, every day. But now she was beginning to
    doubt whether the supply was, after all, so inexhaustible as she had
    once supposed. People of her own age, she found, were already
    set fast in the little social worlds they had made for themselves.
    And people of the younger generation seemed to find it hard to
    believe that she felt, in her heart, just as young as they did. They
    mostly treated her with the rather distant politeness which one
    accords to a stranger and an elder person.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I think people are horrid,’ said Irene, giving a particularly
    violent sweep with the hair-brush to emphasize her indignation.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘You won’t be faithless?’ asked Mrs. Aldwinkle.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Irene bent over and, for all answer, kissed her on the forehead.
    Mrs. Aldwinkle opened her glittering blue eyes and looked up at
    her, smiling, as she did so, that siren smile that, for Irene, was
    still as fascinating as it had ever been.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘If only everybody were like my little Irene!’ Mrs. Aldwinkle
    let her head fall forward and once more closed her eyes. There
    was a silence. ‘What are you sighing about in that heart-breaking
    way?’ she suddenly asked.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Irene’s blush ran tingling up into her temples and disappeared
    under the copper-coloured fringe. ‘Oh, nothing,’ she said, with
    an off-handedness that expressed the depth of her guilty embarrassment.
    That deep intake of breath, that brief and passionate
    expiry were not the components of a sigh. She had been yawning
    with her mouth shut.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>But Mrs. Aldwinkle, with her bias towards the romantic, did
    not suspect the truth. ‘Nothing, indeed!’ she echoed incredulously.
    ‘Why, it was the noise of the wind blowing through the
    cracks of a broken heart. I never heard such a sigh.’ She looked
    at the reflection of Irene’s face in the mirror. ‘And you’re
    blushing like a peony. What is it?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘But it’s nothing, I tell you,’ Irene declared, speaking almost
    in a tone of irritation. She was annoyed with herself for having
    yawned so ineptly and blushed so pointlessly, rather than with her
    aunt. She immersed herself more than ever deeply in her brushing,
    hoping and praying that Mrs. Aldwinkle would drop the
    subject.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>But Mrs. Aldwinkle was implacable in her tactlessness. ‘I
    never heard anything that sounded so love-sick,’ she said, smiling
    archly into the looking-glass. Mrs. Aldwinkle’s humorous sallies
    had a way of falling ponderously, like bludgeon strokes, on the
    objects of her raillery. One never knew, when she was being
    sprightly, whether to feel sorrier for the victim or for Mrs. Aldwinkle
    herself. For though the victim might get hard knocks, the
    spectacle of Mrs. Aldwinkle laboriously exerting herself to deliver
    them was sadly ludicrous; one wished, for her sake, for the sake of
    the whole human race, that she would desist. But she never did.
    Mrs. Aldwinkle always carried all her jokes to the foreseen end,
    and generally far further than was foreseeable by any one less ponderously
    minded than herself. ‘It was like a whale sighing!’ she
    went on with a frightful playfulness. ‘It must be a grand passion
    of the largest size. Who is it? Who is it?’ She raised her
    eyebrows, she smiled with what seemed to her, as she studied it
    in the glass, a most wickedly sly but charming smile—like a smile
    in a comedy by Congreve, it occurred to her.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘But, Aunt Lilian,’ protested Irene, almost in despair, almost
    in tears, ‘it was nothing, I tell you.’ At moments like this she
    could almost find it in her to hate Aunt Lilian. ‘As a matter of
    fact, I was only .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.’ She was going to blurt it out courageously;
    she was just going to tell Aunt Lilian—at the risk of a teasing
    or an almost equally unwelcome solicitude: either were better
    than this—that she had been merely yawning. But Mrs. Aldwinkle,
    still relentlessly pursuing her fun, interrupted her.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘But I guess who it is,’ she said, wagging a forefinger at the
    glass. ‘I guess. I’m not such a blind stupid old auntie as you
    think. You imagine I haven’t noticed. Silly child! Did she
    think I didn’t see that he was very assiduous and that she rather
    liked it? Did she think her stupid old auntie was blind?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Irene blushed again; the tears came into her eyes. ‘But who
    are you talking about?’ she said in a voice that she had to make a
    great effort to keep from breaking and trembling out of control.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘What an innocent!’ mocked Mrs. Aldwinkle, still very Congreve.
    And at this point—earlier than was usual with her on these
    occasions—she had mercy and consented to put poor Irene out of
    her agony. ‘Why, Hovenden,’ she said. ‘Who else should it be?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Hovenden?’ Irene repeated with genuine surprise.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Injured innocence!’ Mrs. Aldwinkle momentarily renewed
    her trampling fun. ‘But it’s sufficiently obvious,’ she went on in
    a more natural voice. ‘The poor boy follows you like a dog.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Me?’ Irene had been too much preoccupied in following her
    Aunt Lilian to notice that she in her turn was being followed.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Now don’t pretend,’ said Mrs. Aldwinkle. ‘It’s so stupid
    pretending. Much better to be frank and straightforward.
    Admit, now, that you like him.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Irene admitted. ‘Yes, of course I like him. But not .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. not
    in any special way. I’d really not thought of him like that.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>A shade contemptuously, benevolently amused, Mrs. Aldwinkle
    smiled. She forgot her depression, forgot her causes of personal
    complaint against the universal order of things. Absorbed in the
    uniquely interesting subject, in the sole and proper study of mankind,
    she was once more happy. Love—it was the only thing.
    Even Art, compared with it, hardly existed. Mrs. Aldwinkle was
    almost as much interested in other people’s love as in her own.
    She wanted every one to love, constantly and complicatedly. She
    liked to bring people together, to foster tender feelings, to watch
    the development of passion, to assist—when it happened; and
    Mrs. Aldwinkle was always rather disappointed when it did not—at
    the tragic catastrophe. And then, when the first love, growing
    old, had lingeringly or violently died, there was the new love to
    think of, to arrange, to foster, to watch; and then the third, the
    fourth.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. One must always follow the spontaneous motions
    of the heart; it is the divine within us that stirs in the heart. And
    one must worship Eros so reverently that one can never be content
    with anything but the most poignant, most passionate manifestations
    of his power. To be content with a love that has turned in
    the course of time to mere affection, kindliness and quiet comprehension
    is almost to blaspheme against the name of Eros.
    Your true lover, thought Mrs. Aldwinkle, leaves the old, paralytic
    love and turns whole-heartedly to the young passion.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘What a goose you are!’ said Mrs. Aldwinkle. ‘I sometimes
    wonder,’ she went on, ‘whether you’re capable of being
    in love at all, you’re so uncomprehending, so cold.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Irene protested with all the energy of which she was capable.
    One could not have lived as long as she had in Mrs. Aldwinkle’s
    company without regarding the imputation of coldness, of insensitiveness
    to passion, as the most damning of all possible
    impeachments. It was better to be accused of being a murderess—particularly
    if it were a case of <span class='it'>crime passionnel</span>. ‘I don’t
    know how you say that,’ she said indignantly. ‘I’m always in
    love.’ Had there not been Peter, and Jacques, and Mario?</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘You may think you have,’ said Mrs. Aldwinkle contemptuously,
    forgetting that it was she herself who had persuaded Irene that
    she was in love. ‘But it was more imagination than the real
    thing. Some women are born like that.’ She shook her head.
    ‘And they die like that.’ One might have inferred from Mrs.
    Aldwinkle’s words and the tone of her voice that Irene was a
    superannuated spinster of forty, proved conclusively, after twenty
    years of accumulated evidence, to be incapable of anything remotely
    resembling an amorous passion.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Irene made no answer, but went on brushing her aunt’s hair.
    Mrs. Aldwinkle’s aspersions were particularly wounding to her.
    She wished that she could do something startling to prove their
    baselessness. Something spectacular.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘And I’ve always thought Hovenden an extremely nice boy,’
    Mrs. Aldwinkle continued, with the air of pursuing an argument.
    She talked on. Irene listened and went on brushing.</p>

    <h2>CHAPTER IX</h2>

    <p class='pindent'>In the silence and solitude of her room, Miss Thriplow sat up
    for a long time, pen in hand, in front of an open note-book.
    ‘Darling Jim,’ she wrote, ‘darling Jim. To-day you came back
    to me so suddenly and unexpectedly that I could almost have
    cried aloud in front of all those people. Was it an accident that
    I picked that stiff leaf from Apollo’s tree and crushed it to fragrance
    between my fingers? Or were you there? was it you who secretly
    whispered to the unconscious part of me, telling me to pick that
    leaf? I wonder; oh, I wonder and wonder. Sometimes I
    believe that there are no accidents, that we do nothing by chance.
    To-night I felt sure of it.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘But I wonder what made you want to remind me of Mr. Chigwell’s
    little shop at Weltringham. Why did you want to make
    me see you sitting in the barber’s chair, so stiff and grown-up, with
    the wheel of the mechanical brush still turning overhead and
    Mr. Chigwell saying, “Hair’s very dry, Mr. Thriplow”? And
    the rubber driving band used always to remind me .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.’ Miss
    Thriplow recorded the simile of the wounded snake which had
    first occurred to her this evening. There was no particular reason
    why she should have antedated the conceit and attributed its invention
    to her childhood. It was just a question of literary tact;
    it seemed more interesting if one said that it had been made up
    when one was a child; that was all. ‘I ask myself whether there
    is any particular significance in this reminder. Or perhaps it’s
    just that you find me neglectful and unremembering—poor darling,
    darling Jim—and take whatever opportunity offers of reminding
    me that you existed, that you still exist. Forgive me, Jim. Everybody
    forgets. We should all be kind and good and unselfish if
    we always remembered—remembered that other people are just
    as much alive and individual and complicated as we are, remembered
    that everybody can be just as easily hurt, that everybody needs
    love just as much, that the only visible reason why we exist in the
    world is to love and be loved. But that’s no excuse for me.
    It’s no excuse for any one to say that other people are just as bad.
    I ought to remember more. I oughtn’t to let my mind be choked
    with weeds. It’s not only the memory of you that the weeds
    choke; it’s everything that’s best and most delicate and finest.
    Perhaps you reminded me of Mr. Chigwell and the bay rum in
    order to remind me at the same time to love more, and admire
    more, and sympathize more, and be more aware. Darling Jim.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>She put down her pen, and looking out through the open window
    at the starry sky she tried to think of him, tried to think of death.
    But it was difficult to think of death. It was difficult, she found,
    to keep the mind uninterruptedly on the idea of extinction, of
    non-life instead of life, of nothingness. In books one reads about
    sages meditating. She herself had often tried to meditate. But
    somehow it never seemed to come to much. All sorts of little
    irrelevant thoughts kept coming into her head. There was no
    focussing death, no keeping it steadily under the mind’s eye. In
    the end she found herself reading through what she had written
    putting in a stop here and there, correcting slips in the style, where
    it seemed to be too formal, too made-up, insufficiently spontaneous
    and unsuitable to the secret diary.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>At the end of the last paragraph she added another ‘darling
    Jim,’ and she repeated the words to herself, aloud, again and again.
    The exercise produced its usual effect; she felt the tears coming
    into her eyes.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>The Quakers pray as the spirit moves them; but to let oneself
    be moved by the spirit is an arduous business. Kindlier and more
    worldly churches, with a feeling for human weakness, provide their
    worshippers with rituals, litanies, beads and prayer wheels.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Darling Jim, darling Jim.’ Miss Thriplow had found the
    form of words for her worship. ‘Darling Jim.’ The tears did
    her good; she felt better, kinder, softer. And then, suddenly,
    she seemed to be listening to herself from outside. ‘Darling
    Jim.’ But did she really care at all? Wasn’t it all a comedy,
    all a pretence? He had died so long ago; he had nothing to do
    with her now. Why should she care or remember? And all this
    systematic thinking about him, this writing of things in a secret
    diary devoted to his memory—wasn’t all that merely for the sake
    of keeping her emotions in training? Wasn’t she deliberately
    scratching her heart to make it bleed, and then writing stories
    with the red fluid?</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Miss Thriplow put away the thoughts as soon as they occurred
    to her: put them aside indignantly. They were monstrous
    thoughts, lying thoughts.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>She picked up her pen again and wrote, very quickly, as though
    she were writing an exorcizing spell and the sooner it had been
    put on paper the sooner the evil thoughts would vanish.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Do you remember, Jim, that time we went out in the canoe
    together and nearly got drowned? .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.’</p>

    <div><span class='pageno' title='83' id='Page_83'></span><h1>PART II<br/> <span class='sub-head'>FRAGMENTS <span class='it'>from the</span> AUTOBIOGRAPHY <span class='it'>of</span> FRANCIS CHELIFER</span></h1></div>

    <h2>CHAPTER I</h2>

    <p class='pindent'>Old gentlemen in clubs were not more luxuriously cradled
    than I along the warm Tyrrhenian. Arms outstretched, like a
    live cross, I floated face upwards on that blue and tepid sea. The
    sun beat down on me, turning the drops on my face and chest to
    salt. My head was pillowed in the unruffled water; my limbs
    and body dimpled the surface of a pellucid mattress thirty feet
    thick and cherishingly resilient through all its thickness, down to
    the sandy bed on which it was spread. One might lie paralysed
    here for a life-time and never get a bedsore.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>The sky above me was filmy with the noonday heat. The
    mountains, when I turned towards the land to look for them, had
    almost vanished behind a veil of gauze. But the Grand Hotel,
    on the other hand, though not perhaps quite so grand as it appeared
    in its illustrated prospectus—for there the front door was forty
    feet high and four tall acrobats standing on one another’s shoulders
    could not have reached to the sills of the ground-floor windows—the
    Grand Hotel made no attempt to conceal itself; the white
    villas glared out unashamedly from their groves of pines; and in
    front of them, along the tawny beach, I could see the bathing huts,
    the striped umbrellas, the digging children, the bathers splashing
    and wallowing in the hot shallows—half-naked men like statues
    of copper, girls in bright tunics, little boiled shrimps instead of
    little boys, and sleek ponderous walruses with red heads, who were
    the matrons in their rubber caps and their wet black bathing
    garments. Here and there over the surface of the sea moved
    what the natives called <span class='it'>patini</span>—catamarans made of a pair of boxed-in
    pontoons joined together near the ends and with a high seat for
    the rower in the middle. Slowly, trailing behind them as they
    went loud wafts of Italian gallantry, giggles and song, they
    crawled across the flat blueness. Sometimes, at the head of its
    white wake, its noise and its stink, a motor boat would pass, and
    suddenly my transparent mattress would rock beneath me,
    as the waves of its passage lifted me and let me drop and lifted
    me up again, more and ever more languidly, till all was once more
    smooth.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>So much for that. The description, as I see now that I come
    to re-read it, is not inelegant. For though I may not have played
    a hand of Bridge since I was eight and have never learned Mah
    Jong, I can claim at least to have studied the rules of style. I
    have learned the art of writing well, which is the art of saying
    nothing elaborately. I have acquired all the literary accomplishments.
    But then, if I may say so without fatuity, I also have a
    talent. ‘Nothing profits more than self-esteem founded on just
    and right.’ I have Milton on my side to justify me in my assertion.
    When I write well, it is not merely another way of writing badly
    about nothing. In this respect my effusions differ a little from
    those of my cultured colleagues. I occasionally have something
    to say, and I find that the elegant but florid saying of it is as easy to
    me as walking. Not, of course, that I attach the slightest importance
    to that. I might have as much to say as La Rochefoucauld
    and as much facility for saying it as Shelley. But what of that?
    It would be great art, you say. No doubt; but what of <span class='it'>that</span>?
    It’s a queer prejudice, this one of ours in favour of art. Religion,
    patriotism, the moral order, humanitarianism, social reform—we
    have all of us, I imagine, dropped all those overboard long ago.
    But we still cling pathetically to art. Quite unreasonably; for
    the thing has far less reason for existence than most of the objects
    of worship we have got rid of, is utterly senseless, indeed, without
    their support and justification. Art for art’s sake—halma for
    halma’s sake. It is time to smash the last and silliest of the idols.
    My friends, I adjure you, put away the ultimate and sweetest of
    the inebriants and wake up at last completely sober—among the
    dustbins at the bottom of the area steps.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>This little digression will suffice, I hope, to show that I labour,
    while writing, under no illusions. I do not suppose that anything
    I do has the slightest importance, and if I take so much pains in
    imparting beauty and elegance to these autobiographical fragments,
    it is chiefly from force of habit. I have practised the art of
    literature so long that it comes natural to me to take the pains I
    have always taken. You may ask why I write at all, if I regard
    the process as being without importance? It is a pertinent
    question. Why do you do this inconsistent thing? I can only
    plead weakness in justification. On principle I disapprove of
    writing; on principle I desire to live brutishly like any other
    ordinary human being. The flesh is willing, but the spirit is weak.
    I confess I grow bored. I pine for amusements other than those
    legitimate distractions offered by the cinema and the Palais de
    Danse. I struggle, I try to resist the temptation; but in the end
    I succumb. I read a page of Wittgenstein, I play a little Bach;
    I write a poem, a few aphorisms, a fable, a fragment of autobiography.
    I write with care, earnestly, with passion even, just
    as if there were some point in what I were doing, just as if it were
    important for the world to know my thoughts, just as if I had a
    soul to save by giving expression to them. But I am well aware,
    of course, that all these delightful hypotheses are inadmissible.
    In reality I write as I do merely to kill time and amuse a mind that
    is still, in spite of all my efforts, a prey to intellectual self-indulgence.
    I look forward to a placid middle age when, having finally overcome
    the old Adam in me, finally quenched all the extravagant
    spiritual cravings, I shall be able to settle down in tranquillity
    to that life of the flesh, that natural human existence which still,
    I fear, seems to me so forbidding, so austerely monotonous, so
    tedious. I have not yet attained to that blessed state. Hence
    these divagations into art; let me beg forgiveness for them. And
    above all, let me implore you once more not to imagine that I
    attach the slightest importance to them. My vanity would be
    hurt if I thought you did.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Poor Mrs. Aldwinkle, for example—there was some one who
    could never believe that I was not an art-for-arter. ‘But Chelifer,’
    she used to say to me in her aimed, intent, breathless way, ‘how
    <span class='it'>can</span> you blaspheme like that against your own talent?’ And I
    would put on my most Egyptian air—I have always been accused
    of looking like an Egyptian sculpture—my most Sphingine smile,
    and say: ‘But I am a democrat; how can I allow my talent to
    blaspheme against my humanity?’—or something enigmatic of
    that kind. Poor Mrs. Aldwinkle! But I run on too fast. I
    have begun to talk of Mrs. Aldwinkle and you do not know who
    Mrs. Aldwinkle is. Nor did I, for that matter, as I reclined that
    morning along the soft resilient water—I knew no more, then,
    than her name; who does not? Mrs. Aldwinkle the salonnière,
    the hostess, the giver of literary parties and agapes of lions—is
    she not classical? a household word? a familiar quotation? Of
    course. But in the flesh, till that moment, I had never seen her.
    Not through any lack of exertions on her part. For only a few
    months before, a telegram had arrived for me at my publisher’s:
    ‘<span style='font-size:smaller'>PRINCE PAPADIAMANTOPOULOS JUST ARRIVED MOST ANXIOUS TO KNOW
    BEST LITERARY ARTISTIC INTELLECTUAL SOCIETY IN LONDON COULD
    YOU DINE MEET HIM THURSDAY EIGHT FIFTEEN 112 BERKELEY
    SQUARE LILIAN ALDWINKLE.</span>’ In this telegraphic form, and couched
    in those terms, the invitation had certainly seemed alluring. But
    a little judicious inquiry showed me that the prospect was not
    really quite so attractive as it appeared. For Prince Papadiamantopoulos
    turned out, in spite of his wonderfully promising
    title and name, to be a perfectly serious intellectual like the rest of
    us. More serious indeed; for I discovered, to my horror, that
    he was a first-class geologist and could understand the differential
    calculus. Among the other guests were to be at least three decent
    writers and one painter. And Mrs. Aldwinkle herself was
    rumoured to be quite well educated and not entirely a fool. I
    filled up the reply-paid form and took it to the nearest post office.
    ‘<span class='sc'>MUCH REGRET NEVER DINE OUT EXCEPT IN LENT FRANCIS CHELIFER.</span>’
    During Lent I confidently expected to receive another invitation.
    I was relieved, however, and a little disappointed, to hear no more
    from Mrs. Aldwinkle. I should have liked her to make, in vain,
    a further effort to lure me from my allegiance to Lady Giblet.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Ah, those evenings at Lady Giblet’s—I never miss a single
    one if I can help it. The vulgarity, ignorance and stupidity of
    the hostess, the incredible second-rateness of her mangy lions—these
    are surely unique. And then those camp-followers of the
    arts, those delicious Bohemians who regard their ability to appreciate
    the paintings of the cubists and the music of Stravinsky as a sufficient
    justification for helping themselves freely to one another’s wives—nowhere
    can you see such brilliant specimens of the type as at
    Lady Giblet’s. And the conversations one hears within those
    marble halls—nowhere, surely, are pretensions separated from
    justifying facts by a vaster gulf. Nowhere can you hear the
    ignorant, the illogical, the incapable of thought talking so glibly
    about things of which they have not the slightest understanding.
    And then you should hear them boasting parenthetically, as they
    express an imbecile’s incoherent opinion, of their own clear-headedness,
    their modern outlook, their ruthless scientific intelligence.
    Surely you can find nothing so perfect in its kind as at Lady Giblet’s—I
    at least know of nothing more complete. At Mrs. Aldwinkle’s
    one might very likely hear a serious conversation; never by any
    chance in the salon of <span class='it'>my</span> choice.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>But that morning in the blue Tyrrhenian was the last of my life
    to be passed beyond the pale of Mrs. Aldwinkle’s acquaintanceship;
    it was also as nearly as possible the first of my future life.
    Fate seemed that morning to be in doubt whether to extinguish
    me completely or merely to make me acquainted with Mrs. Aldwinkle.
    Fortunately, as I like to think, it chose the latter alternative.
    But I anticipate.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>I first saw Mrs. Aldwinkle on this particular morning without
    knowing who she was. From where I was lying on my mattress
    of blue brine I noticed a heavily laden <span class='it'>patino</span> bearing slowly down
    upon me from the shore. Perched high on the rower’s bench a
    tall young man was toiling languidly at the oars. His back against
    the bench, his hairy legs stretched out along the prow of one of the
    pontoons, sat a thick-set oldish man with a red face and short
    white hair. The bow of the other pontoon accommodated two
    women. The elder and larger of them sat in front, trailing her
    legs in the water; she was dressed in a kilted bathing costume of
    flame-coloured silk and her hair was tied up in a pink bandana
    handkerchief. Immediately behind her there squatted, her knees
    drawn up to her chin, a very youthful slender little creature in a
    black maillot. In one of her hands she held a green parasol with
    which she kept off the sunlight from her elder companion. Within
    the cylinder of greenish shadow the pink and flame-coloured lady,
    whom I afterwards learnt to be Mrs. Aldwinkle herself, looked
    like a Chinese lantern lighted in a conservatory; and when an
    accidental movement of the young girl’s umbrella allowed the
    sunlight for a moment to touch her face, one could imagine that
    the miracle of the raising of Lazarus was being performed before
    one’s eyes—for the green and corpse-like hue suddenly left the
    features, the colours of health, a little inflamed by the reflections
    from the bathing dress, seemed to rush back. The dead lived.
    But only for an instant; for the solicitous care of the young girl
    soon reversed the miracle. The sunshade swung back into position,
    the penumbra of the greenhouse enveloped the glowing
    lamp and the living face once more became ghastly, as though it
    belonged to some one who had lain for three days in the tomb.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>At the stern, seen clearly only when the ponderous boat was
    already beginning to pass me, sat another young woman with a pale
    face and large dark eyes. A tendril of almost black hair escaped
    from under her bathing cap and fell, like a curling whisker, down
    her cheek. A handsome young man with a brown face and brown
    muscular arms and legs sprawled along the stern of the other
    pontoon, smoking a cigarette.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>The voices that faintly came to me from the approaching boat
    sounded, somehow, more familiar than those I had heard from other
    <span class='it'>patini</span>. I became aware, all at once, that they were speaking English.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘The clouds,’ I heard the old red-faced gentleman saying (he
    had just turned round, in obedience to a gesture from the Chinese
    lantern in the conservatory, to look at the piled-up masses of
    vapour that hung like another fantastic range above the real
    mountains), ‘the clouds you so much admire are only made possible
    by the earth’s excrementitious dust hanging in the air. There
    are thousands of particles to every cubic centimetre. The water
    vapour condenses round them in droplets sufficiently large to be
    visible. Hence the clouds—marvellous and celestial shapes, but
    with a core of dust. What a symbol of human idealism!’ The
    melodious voice grew louder and louder as the young man dipped
    and dipped his oars. ‘Earthy particles transfigured into heavenly
    forms. The heavenly forms are not self-existent, not absolute.
    Dust writes these vast characters across the sky.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Preserve me, I thought. Did I come to Marina di Vezza to
    listen to this sort of thing?</p>

    <p class='pindent'>In a voice loud but indistinct, and strangely unmusical, the
    Chinese lantern lady began to quote Shelley, incorrectly. ‘ “From
    peak to peak in a bridge-like .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.” ’ she began, and relapsed into
    silence, clawing the air in search of the synonym for shape which
    ought to rhyme with peak. ‘ “Over a something sea.” I think
    <span class='it'>The Cloud</span> is almost the loveliest of all. It’s wonderful to think
    that Shelley sailed in this sea. And that he was burnt only a
    little way off, down there.’ She pointed down the coast to where,
    behind the haze, the interminable sea-front of Viareggio stretched
    away mile after mile. Faintly now one might discern the ghost
    of its nearest outskirts. But at evening it would emerge; clear
    and sharp in the sloping light, as though they had been cut from
    gems, Palace and Grande Bretagne, Europe (<span class='it'>già</span> Aquila Nera)
    and Savoia would twinkle there, majestic toys, among the innumerable
    lesser inns and boarding-houses, reduced at this distance
    to an exquisite loveliness and so pathetically small and delicate
    that one could almost have wept over them. At this very moment,
    on the other side of the curtain of haze, a hundred thousand
    bathers were thronging the empty beaches where Shelley’s body
    had been committed to the fire. The pinewoods in which, riding
    out from Pisa, he hunted lovely thoughts through the silence and the
    fragrant shadows teemed now with life. Unnumbered country
    copulatives roamed at this moment through those glades.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. And
    so forth. Style pours out of my fountain pen. In every drachm
    of blue-black ink a thousand <span class='it'>mots justes</span> are implicit, like the future
    characteristics of a man in a piece of chromosome. I apologize.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Youth, then, at the prow and pleasure at the helm—and the
    flesh was so glossy under the noonday sun, the colours so blazingly
    bright, that I was really reminded of Etty’s little ravishment—the
    laden boat passed slowly within a few yards of me. Stretched
    like a live cross on my mattress of brine I looked at them languidly
    through half-closed eyes. They looked at me; a blank incuriosity
    was on their faces—for a glimpse only, then they averted their
    eyes as though I had been one of those exhausted frogs one sees,
    after the breeding season, floating belly upwards on the surface
    of a pond. And yet I was what is technically known as an immortal
    soul. It struck me that it would have been more reasonable
    if they had stopped their boat and hailed me across the water.
    ‘Good morning, stranger. How goes your soul? And what
    shall we do to be saved?’ But on the other hand, our habit of
    regarding strangers as being nothing more to us than exhausted
    frogs probably saves a good deal of trouble.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘From cape to cape,’ emended the red-faced gentleman, as they
    receded from me.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>And very diffidently, in a soft shy voice, the solicitous young
    creature suggested that the something sea was a torrent sea.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Whatever vat may be,’ said the young rower, whose exertions
    under the broiling sun entitled him to take the professionally
    nautical, commonsense view about the matter.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘But it’s obvious what it is,’ said the Chinese lantern lady,
    rather contemptuously. The young man at the stern threw away
    his cigarette and started meditatively whistling the tune of ‘<span class='it'>Deh,
    vieni alla finestra</span>’ from <span class='it'>Don Giovanni</span>.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>There was a silence; the boat receded, stroke after stroke.
    The last words I heard were uttered, drawlingly and in a rather
    childish voice, by the young woman in the stern. ‘I wish I could
    get brown more quickly,’ she said, lifting one foot out of the water
    and looking at the white bare leg. ‘One might have been living
    in a cellar. Such a dreadfully unwholesome look of blanched
    asparagus. Or even mushrooms,’ she added pensively.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>The Chinese lantern lady said something, then the red-faced
    man. But the conversation had ceased to be articulately audible.
    Soon I could hear no more; they had gone, leaving behind them,
    however, the name of Shelley. It was here, along these waters,
    that he had sailed his flimsy boat. In one hand he held his
    Sophocles, with the other the tiller. His eyes looked now at
    the small Greek letters, now to the horizon, or landwards towards
    the mountains and clouds. ‘Port your helm, Shelley,’ Captain
    Williams would shout. And the helm went hard over to starboard;
    the ship staggered, almost capsized. Then, one day,
    flash! the black opaque sky split right across; crash and rumble!
    the thunder exploded overhead and with the noise of boulders
    being trundled over the surface of the metal clouds, the echoes
    rolled about the heavens and among the mountains—‘from peak
    to peak,’ it occurred to me, adopting the Chinese lantern lady’s
    emendation, ‘from peak to peak with a gong-like squeak.’ (What
    an infamy!) And then, with a hiss and a roar, the whirl-blast
    was upon them. It was all over.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Even without the Chinese lantern lady’s hint I should probably
    have started thinking of Shelley. For to live on this coast, between
    the sea and the mountains, among alternate flawless calms
    and shattering sudden storms, is like living inside one of Shelley’s
    poems. One walks through a transparent and phantasmagorical
    beauty. But for the hundred thousand bathers, the jazz band
    in the Grand Hotel, the unbroken front which civilization, in the
    form of boarding-houses, presents for miles at a time to the alien
    and empty sea, but for all these, one might seriously lose one’s
    sense of reality and imagine that fancy had managed to transform
    itself into fact. In Shelley’s days, when the coast was all
    but uninhabited, a man might have had some excuse for forgetting
    the real nature of things. Living here in an actual world practically
    indistinguishable from one of imagination, a man might almost
    be justified for indulging his fancy to the extravagant lengths to
    which Shelley permitted his to go.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>But a man of the present generation, brought up in typical
    contemporary surroundings, has no justifications of this sort.
    A modern poet cannot permit himself the mental luxuries in which
    his predecessors so freely wallowed. Lying there on the water,
    I repeated to myself some verses, inspired by reflections like these,
    which I had written some few months before.</p>

    <div class='poetry-container' style=''><div class='lgp'> <!-- rend=';' -->
    <p class='line0'>The Holy Ghost comes sliding down</p>
    <p class='line0'>On Ilford, Golders Green and Penge.</p>
    <p class='line0'>His hosts infect him as they rot;</p>
    <p class='line0'>The victims take their just revenge.</p>
    <p class='line'>&#160;</p>
    <p class='line0'>For if of old the sons of squires</p>
    <p class='line0'>And livery stable keepers turned</p>
    <p class='line0'>To flowers and hope, to Greece and God,</p>
    <p class='line0'>We in our later age have learned</p>
    <p class='line'>&#160;</p>
    <p class='line0'>That we are native where we walk</p>
    <p class='line0'>Through the dim streets of Camden Town.</p>
    <p class='line0'>But hopeful still through twice-breathed air</p>
    <p class='line0'>The Holy Ghost comes shining down.</p>
    </div></div> <!-- end poetry block --><!-- end rend -->

    <p class='noindent'>I wrote these lines, I remember, one dark afternoon in my office
    in Gog’s Court, Fetter Lane. It is in the same office, on an
    almost perfectly similar afternoon, that I am writing now. The
    reflector outside my window reflects a faint and muddy light
    that has to be supplemented by electricity from within. An
    inveterate smell of printer’s ink haunts the air. From the basement
    comes up the thudding and clanking of presses; they are
    turning out the weekly two hundred thousand copies of the
    ‘Woman’s Fiction Budget.’ We are at the heart, here, of our
    human universe. Come, then, let us frankly admit that we are
    citizens of this mean city, make the worst of it resolutely and
    not try to escape.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>To escape, whether in space or in time, you must run a great
    deal further now than there was any need to do a hundred years
    ago when Shelley boated on the Tyrrhenian and conjured up
    millennial visions. You must go further in space, because there
    are more people, more and faster vehicles. The Grand Hotel,
    the hundred thousand bathers, the jazz bands have introduced
    themselves into that Shelleian poem which is the landscape of
    Versilia. And the millennium which seemed in the days of
    Godwin not so very remote has receded further and further from
    us, as each Reform Bill, each victory over entrenched capitalism
    dashed yet another illusion to the ground. To escape, in 1924,
    one must go to Tibet, one must look forward to at least the year
    3000; and who knows? they are probably listening-in in the
    Dalai Lama’s palace; and it is probable that the millennial state
    of a thousand years hence will be millennial only because it has
    contrived to make slavery, for the first time, really scientific and
    efficient.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>An escape in space, even if one contrives successfully to make
    one, is no real escape at all. A man may live in Tibet or among
    the Andes; but he cannot therefore deny that London and Paris
    actually exist, he cannot forget that there are such places as New
    York and Berlin. For the majority of contemporary human
    beings, London and Manchester are the rule; you may have
    fled to the eternal spring of Arequipa, but you are not living in
    what is, for the mass of human consciousness, reality.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>An escape in time is no more satisfactory. You live in the
    radiant future, live for the future. You console yourself for the
    spectacle of things as they are by the thought of what they will
    be. And you work, perhaps, to make them be what you think
    they ought to be. I know all about it, I assure you. I have
    done it all myself—lived in a state of permanent intoxication
    at the thought of what was to come, working happily for a gorgeous
    ideal of happiness. But a little reflection suffices to show how
    absurd these forward lookings, these labours for the sake of what
    is to be, really are. For, to begin with, we have no reason to
    suppose that there is going to be a future at all, at any rate for
    human beings. In the second place we do not know whether the
    ideal of happiness towards which we are striving may not turn
    out either to be totally unrealizable or, if realizable, utterly repellent
    to humanity. Do people want to be happy? If there
    were a real prospect of achieving a permanent and unvarying
    happiness, wouldn’t they shrink in horror from the boring consummation?
    And finally, the contemplation of the future, the
    busy working for it, does not prevent the present from existing.
    It merely partially blinds us to the present.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>The same objections apply with equal force to the escapes
    which do not launch out into space or time, but into Platonic
    eternity, into the ideal. An escape into mere fancy does not
    prevent facts from going on; it is a disregarding of the
    facts.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Finally there are those people, more courageous than the escapers,
    who actually plunge into the real contemporary life around them,
    and are consoled by finding in the midst of its squalor, its repulsiveness
    and stupidity, evidences of a widespread kindliness, of charity,
    pity and the like. True, these qualities exist and the spectacle
    of them is decidedly cheering; in spite of civilization, men have
    not fallen below the brutes. Parents, even in human society,
    are devoted to their offspring; even in human society the weak
    and the afflicted are sometimes assisted. It would be surprising,
    considering the origins and affinities of man, if this were not the
    case. Have you ever read an obituary notice of which the subject
    did not possess, under his rough exterior and formidable manner,
    a heart of gold? And the obituarists, however cloying their
    literary productions, are perfectly right. We all have hearts of
    gold, though we are sometimes, it is true, too much preoccupied
    with our own affairs to remember the fact. The really cruel,
    the fundamentally evil man is as rare as the man of genius or the
    total idiot. I have never met a man with a really bad heart.
    And the fact is not surprising; for a man with a really bad heart
    is a man with certain instincts developed to an abnormal degree
    and certain others more or less completely atrophied. I have
    never met a man like Mozart for that matter.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Charles Dickens, it is true, managed to feel elated and chronically
    tearful over the existence of virtues among the squalor. ‘He
    shows,’ as one of his American admirers so fruitily puts it, ‘that
    life in its rudest forms may wear a tragic grandeur; that amidst
    follies and excesses the moral feelings do not wholly die, and
    that the haunts of the blackest crime are sometimes lighted up
    by the presence of the noblest souls.’ And very nice too. But
    is there any great reason to feel elated by the emergence of virtues
    in human society? We are not specially elated by the fact that
    men have livers and pancreases. Virtues are as natural to man as
    his digestive organs; any sober biologist, taking into consideration
    his gregarious instincts, would naturally expect to find
    them.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>This being the case, there is nothing in these virtues <span class='it'>à la</span> Dickens
    to ‘write home about’—as we used to say at a time when we
    were remarkably rich in such virtues. There is no reason to be
    particularly proud of qualities which we inherit from our animal
    forefathers and share with our household pets. The gratifying
    thing would be if we could find in contemporary society evidences
    of peculiarly human virtues—the conscious rational virtues that
    ought to belong by definition to a being calling himself Homo
    Sapiens. Open-mindedness, for example, absence of irrational
    prejudice, complete tolerance and a steady, reasonable pursuit of
    social goods. But these, alas, are precisely what we fail to discover.
    For to what, after all, are all this squalor, this confusion
    and ugliness due but to the lack of the human virtues? The
    fact is that—except for an occasional sport of Nature, born now
    here, now there, and always out of time—we sapient men have
    practically no human virtues at all. Spend a week in any great
    town, and the fact is obvious. So complete is this lack of truly
    human qualities that we are reduced, if we condescend to look
    at reality at all, to act like Charles Dickens and congratulate the
    race on its merely animal virtues. The jolly, optimistic fellows
    who assure us that humanity is all right, because mothers love
    their children, poor folk pity and help one another, and soldiers
    die for a flag, are comforting us on the grounds that we resemble
    the whales, the elephants and the bees. But when we ask them
    to adduce evidence of human sapience, to give us a few specimens
    of conscious and reasonable well-doing, they rebuke us for our
    intellectual coldness and our general ‘inhumanity’—which
    means our refusal to be content with the standards of the animals.
    However grateful we may feel for the existence in civilized society
    of these homely jungle virtues, we cannot justifiably set them off
    against the horrors and squalors of civilized life. The horrors
    and squalors arise from men’s lack of reason—from their failure
    to be completely and sapiently human. The jungle virtues are
    merely the obverse of this animalism, whose Heads is instinctive
    kindliness and whose Tails is stupidity and instinctive cruelty.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>So much for the last consolation of philosophy. We are left
    with reality. My office in Gog’s Court is situated, I repeat, at
    the very heart of it, the palpitating heart.</p>

    <h2>CHAPTER II</h2>

    <p class='pindent'>Gog’s Court, the navel of reality! Repeating those verses
    of mine in the silence, I intimately felt the truth of it.</p>

    <div class='poetry-container' style=''><div class='lgp'> <!-- rend=';' -->
    <p class='line0'>For if of old the sons of squires</p>
    <p class='line0'>And livery stable keepers turned</p>
    <p class='line0'>To flowers and hope, to Greece and God,</p>
    <p class='line0'>We in our later age have learned</p>
    <p class='line0'>That we are native where we walk.</p>
    </div></div> <!-- end poetry block --><!-- end rend -->

    <p class='pindent'>My voice boomed out oracularly across the flat sea. Nothing
    so richly increases the significance of a statement as to hear it
    uttered by one’s own voice, in solitude. ‘Resolved, so help
    me God, never to touch another drop!’ Those solemn words,
    breathed out in a mist of whiskey—how often, in dark nights,
    on icy mornings, how often have they been uttered! And the
    portentous imprecation seems to engage the whole universe to do
    battle on behalf of the Better Self against its besetting vice.
    Thrilling and awful moment! Merely for the sake of living
    through it again, for the sake of once more breaking the empty
    silence with the reverberating Stygian oath, it is well worth
    neglecting the good resolution. I say nothing of the pleasures
    of inebriation.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>My own brief recital served to confirm for me the truth of
    my speculations. For not only was I uttering the substance of
    my thoughts aloud; I was voicing it in terms of a formula that
    had an element, I flatter myself, of magic about it. What is the
    secret of these verbal felicities? How does it come about that
    a commonplace thought embodied by a poet in some abracadabrical
    form seems bottomlessly profound, while a positively false and
    stupid notion may be made by its expression to seem true? Frankly,
    I don’t know. And what is more, I have never found any one
    who could give an answer to the riddle. What is it that makes
    the two words ‘defunctive music’ as moving as the dead march
    out of the <span class='it'>Eroica</span> and the close of <span class='it'>Coriolan</span>? Why should it be
    somehow more profoundly comic to ‘call Tullia’s ape a marmosite’
    than to write a whole play of Congreve? And the line, ‘Thoughts
    that do often lie too deep for tears’—why should it in effect lie
    where it does? Mystery. This game of art strangely resembles
    conjuring. The quickness of the tongue deceives the brain. It
    has happened, after all, often enough. Old Shakespeare, for
    example. How many critical brains have been deceived by the
    quickness of <span class='it'>his</span> tongue! Because he can say ‘Shoughs, water-rugs
    and demi-wolves,’ and ‘defunctive music,’ and ‘the expense
    of spirit in a waste of shame’ and all the rest of it, we credit him
    with philosophy, a moral purpose and the most penetrating psychology.
    Whereas his thoughts are incredibly confused, his only
    purpose is to entertain and he has created only three characters.
    One, Cleopatra, is an excellent copy from the life, like a character
    out of a good realistic novel, say one of Tolstoy’s. The other
    two—Macbeth and Falstaff—are fabulous imaginary figures,
    consistent with themselves but not real in the sense that Cleopatra
    is real. My poor friend Calamy would call them more real, would
    say that they belong to the realm of Absolute Art. And so forth.
    I cannot go into poor Calamy’s opinions, at any rate in this context;
    later on, perhaps. For me, in any case, Macbeth and Falstaff
    are perfectly genuine and complete mythological characters, like
    Jupiter or Gargantua, Medea or Mr. Winkle. They are the only
    two well-invented mythological monsters in the whole of Shakespeare’s
    collection; just as Cleopatra is the only well-copied reality.
    His boundless capacity for abracadabra has deceived innumerable
    people into imagining that all the other characters are as good.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>But the Bard, heaven help me, is not my theme. Let me return
    to my recitation on the face of the waters. As I have said, my
    conviction ‘that we are native where we walk’ was decidedly
    strengthened by the sound of my own voice pronouncing the
    elegant formula in which the notion was embalmed. Repeating
    the words, I thought of Gog’s Court, of my little room with the
    reflector at the window, of the light that burns in winter even at
    noon, of the smell of printer’s ink and the noise of the presses.
    I was back there, out of this irrelevant poem of a sunshiny landscape,
    back in the palpitating heart of things. On the table before
    me lay a sheaf of long galleys; it was Wednesday; I should have
    been correcting proofs, but I was idle that afternoon! On the
    blank six inches at the bottom of a galley I had been writing those
    lines: ‘For if of old the sons of squires .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.’ Pensively, a halma
    player contemplating his next move, I hung over them. What
    were the possible improvements? There was a knock at the
    door. I drew a sheet of blotting paper across the bottom of the
    galley—‘Come in’—and went on with my interrupted reading
    of the print. ‘.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Since Himalayas were made to breed true to
    colour, no event has aroused greater enthusiasm in the fancier’s
    world than the fixation of the new Flemish-Angora type. Mr.
    Spargle’s achievement is indeed a nepoch-making one.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.’ I
    restored the n of nepoch to its widowed a, and looked up. Mr.
    Bosk, the sub-editor, was standing over me.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Proof of the leader, sir,’ he said, bowing with that exquisitely
    contemptuous politeness which characterized all his dealings with
    me, and handed me another galley.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Thank you, Mr. Bosk,’ I said.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>But Mr. Bosk did not retire. Standing there in his favourite
    and habitual attitude, the attitude assumed by our ancestors (of
    whom, indeed, old Mr. Bosk was one) in front of the half-draped
    marble column of the photographer’s studio, he looked at me,
    faintly smiling through his thin white beard. The third button
    of his waistcoat was undone and his right hand, like a half-posted
    letter, was inserted in the orifice. He rested his weight on a
    rigid right leg. The other leg was slightly bent, and the heel of
    one touching the toe of the other, his left foot made with his right
    a perfect right angle. I could see that I was in for a reproof.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘What is it, Mr. Bosk?’ I asked.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Among the sparse hairs Mr. Bosk’s smile became piercingly
    sweet. He put his head archly on one side. His voice when he
    spoke was mellifluous. On these occasions when I was to be
    dressed down and put in my place his courtesy degenerated into a
    kind of affected girlish coquetry. ‘If you don’t mind my saying
    so, Mr. Chelifer,’ he said mincingly, ‘I think you’ll find that
    <span class='it'>rabear</span> in Spanish does not mean “to wag the tail,” as you say in
    your leader on the derivation of the word “rabbit,” so much as
    “to wag the hind quarters.” ’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Wag the hind quarters, Mr. Bosk?’ I said. ‘But that sounds
    to me a very difficult feat.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Not in Spain, apparently,’ said Mr. Bosk, almost giggling.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘But this is England, Mr. Bosk.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Nevertheless, my authority is no less than Skeat himself.’
    And triumphantly, with the air of one who, at a critical moment
    of the game, produces a fifth ace, Mr. Bosk brought forward his
    left hand, which he had been keeping mysteriously behind his
    back. It held a dictionary; a strip of paper marked the page.
    Mr. Bosk laid it, opened, on the table before me; with a thick
    nail he pointed ‘ “.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. or possibly,” I read aloud, “from Spanish
    <span class='it'>rabear</span>, to wag the hind quarters.” Right as usual, Mr. Bosk.
    I’ll alter it in the proof.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Thank you, sir,’ said Mr. Bosk with a mock humility. Inwardly
    he was exulting in his triumph. He picked up his
    dictionary, repeated his contemptuously courteous bow and
    walked with a gliding noiseless motion towards the door. On the
    threshold he paused. ‘I remember that the question arose once
    before, sir,’ he said; his voice was poisonously honeyed. ‘In
    Mr. Parfitt’s time,’ and he slipped out, closing the door quietly
    behind him.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>It was a Parthian shot. The name of Mr. Parfitt was meant
    to wound me to the quick, to bring the blush of shame to my
    cheek. For had not Mr. Parfitt been the perfect, complete and
    infallible editor? Whereas I .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Mr. Bosk left it to my own
    conscience to decide what I was.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>And indeed I was well aware of my short-comings. ‘The
    Rabbit Fanciers’ Gazette,’ with which, as every schoolboy knows,
    is incorporated ‘The Mouse Breeders’ Record,’ could hardly have
    had a more unsuitable editor than I. To this day, I confess, I
    hardly know the right end of a rabbit from the wrong. Mr. Bosk
    was a survivor from the grand old days of Mr. Parfitt, the founder
    and for thirty years the editor of the Gazette.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Mr. Parfitt, sir,’ he used to tell me every now and then, ‘was
    a <span class='it'>real</span> fancier.’ His successor, by implication, was not.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>It was at the end of the war. I was looking for a job—a job
    at the heart of reality. The illusory nature of the position had
    made me decline my old college’s offer of a fellowship. I wanted
    something—how shall I put it?—more palpitating. And then
    in <span class='it'>The Times</span> I found what I had been looking for. ‘Wanted
    Editor of proved literary ability for livestock trade paper. Apply
    Box 92.’ I applied, was interviewed, and conquered. The
    directors couldn’t finally resist my testimonial from the Bishop
    of Bosham. ‘A life-long acquaintance with Mr. Chelifer and his
    family permits me confidently to assert that he is a young man
    of great ability and high moral purpose, (signed) Hartley Bosh.’
    I was appointed for a probationary period of six months.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Old Mr. Parfitt, the retiring editor, stayed on a few days at
    the office to initiate me into the secrets of the work. He was
    a benevolent old gentleman, short, thick and with a very large
    head. His square face was made to seem even broader than it
    was by the grey whiskers which ran down his cheeks to merge
    imperceptibly into the ends of his moustache. He knew more
    about mice and rabbits than any man in the country; but what he
    prided himself on was his literary gift. He explained to me the
    principles on which he wrote his weekly leaders.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘In the fable,’ he told me, smiling already in anticipation of
    the end of this joke which he had been elaborating and polishing
    since 1892, ‘in the fable it is the mountain which, after a long
    and, if I may say so, geological labour, gives birth to the mouse.
    My principle, on the contrary, has always been, wherever possible,
    to make my mice parturate mountains.’ He paused expectantly.
    When I had laughed, he went on. ‘It’s astonishing what reflections
    on life and art and politics and philosophy and what not
    you can get out of a mouse or a rabbit. Quite astonishing!’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>The most notable of Mr. Parfitt’s mountain thoughts still
    hangs, under glass and in an Oxford frame, on the wall above the
    editorial desk. It was printed in the Rabbit Fancier for August 8,
    1914.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘It is not the readers of the Rabbit Fanciers’ Gazette,’ Mr.
    Parfitt had written on that cardinal date, ‘who have made this
    war. No Mouse Breeder, I emphatically proclaim, has desired it.
    No! Absorbed in their harmless and indeed beneficent occupations,
    they have had neither the wish nor the leisure to disturb the
    world’s peace. If all men whole-heartedly devoted themselves
    to avocations like ours, there would be no war. The world would
    be filled with the innocent creators and fosterers of life, not, as
    at present, with its tigerish destroyers. Had Kaiser William the
    Second been a breeder of rabbits or mice, we should not find
    ourselves to-day in a world whose very existence is threatened by
    the unimaginable horrors of modern warfare.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Noble words! Mr. Parfitt’s righteous indignation was
    strengthened by his fears for the future of his paper. The war,
    he gloomily foreboded, would mean the end of rabbit breeding.
    But he was wrong. Mice, it is true, went rather out of fashion
    between 1914 and 1918. But in the lean years of rationing,
    rabbits took on a new importance. In 1917 there were ten
    fanciers of Flemish Giants to every one there had been before the
    war. Subscriptions rose, advertisements were multiplied.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Rabbits,’ Mr. Parfitt assured me, ‘did a great deal to help
    us win the war.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>And conversely, the war did so much to help rabbits that
    Mr. Parfitt was able to retire in 1919 with a modest but adequate
    fortune. It was then that I took over control. And in spite
    of Mr. Bosk’s contempt for my ignorance and incompetence, I
    must in justice congratulate myself on the way in which I piloted
    the concern through the evil times which followed. Peace found
    the English people at once less prosperous and less hungry than
    they had been during the war. The time had passed when it was
    necessary for them to breed rabbits; and they could not afford
    the luxury of breeding them for pleasure. Subscriptions declined,
    advertisements fell off. I averted an impending catastrophe by
    adding to the paper a new section dealing with goats. Biologically,
    no doubt, as I pointed out to the directors in my communication
    on the subject, this mingling of ruminants with rodents was
    decidedly unsound. But commercially, I felt sure, the innovation
    would be justified. It was. The goats brought half a dozen
    pages of advertisements in their train and several hundred new
    subscribers. Mr. Bosk was furious at my success; but the
    directors thought very highly of my capacities.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>They did not, it is true, always approve of my leading articles.
    ‘Couldn’t you try to make them a little more popular,’ suggested
    the managing director, ‘a little more practical too, Mr. Chelifer?
    For instance,’ and clearing his throat, he unfolded the typewritten
    sheet of complaints which he had had prepared and had brought
    with him to the board meeting, ‘for instance, what’s the practical
    value of this stuff about the use of the word “cony” as a term of
    endearment in the Elizabethan dramatists? And this article
    on the derivation of “rabbit” ’—he looked at his paper again
    and coughed. ‘Who wants to know that there’s a Walloon
    word “robett”? Or that our word may have something to do
    with the Spanish <span class='it'>rabear</span>, to wag the hind quarters? And who,
    by the way,’ he added, looking up at me over his pince-nez with an
    air—prematurely put on—of triumph, ‘who ever heard of an
    animal wagging its hind quarters?’ ‘Nevertheless,’ I said,
    apologetically, but firmly, as befits a man who knows that he is
    right, ‘my authority is no less than Skeat himself.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>The managing director, who had hoped to score a point, went
    on, defeated, to the next count in the indictment. ‘And then,
    Mr. Chelifer,’ he said, ‘we don’t very much like, my fellow
    directors and I, we don’t much like what you say in your article
    on “Rabbit Fancying and its Lesson to Humanity.” It may be
    true that breeders have succeeded in producing domesticated
    rabbits that are four times the weight of wild rabbits and possess
    only half the quantity of brains—it may be true. Indeed, it is
    true. And a very remarkable achievement it is, Mr. Chelifer,
    very remarkable indeed. But that is no reason for upholding,
    as you do, Mr. Chelifer, that the ideal working man, at whose
    production the eugenist should aim, is a man eight times as strong
    as the present-day workman, with only a sixteenth of his mental
    capacity. Not that my fellow directors and I entirely disagree
    with what you say, Mr. Chelifer; far from it. All right-thinking
    men must agree that the modern workman is too well educated.
    But we have to remember, Mr. Chelifer, that many of our readers
    actually belong to that class.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Quite.’ I acquiesced in the reproof.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘And finally, Mr. Chelifer, there is your article on the “Symbology
    of the Goat.” We feel that the facts you have there
    collected, however interesting to the anthropologist and the student
    of folk-lore, are hardly of a kind to be set before a mixed public
    like ours.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>The other directors murmured their assent. There was a
    prolonged silence.</p>

    <h2>CHAPTER III</h2>

    <p class='pindent'>I remember an advertisement—for some sort of cough
    drops I think it was—which used to figure very largely in my
    boyhood on the back covers of the illustrated weeklies. Over the
    legend, ‘A Pine Forest in every Home,’ appeared a picture of three
    or four magnificent Norway spruces growing out of the drawing-room
    carpet, while the lady of the house, her children and guests
    took tea, with a remarkable air of unconcern and as though it was
    quite natural to have a sequoia sprouting out of the hearth-rug,
    under their sanitary and aromatic shade. A Pine Forest in every
    Home.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. But I have thought of something even better. A
    Luna Park in every Office. A British Empire Exhibition Fun
    Fair in every Bank. An Earl’s Court in every Factory. True,
    I cannot claim to bring every attraction of the Fun Fair into your
    place of labour—only the switchback, the water-shoot and the
    mountain railway. Merry-go-round, wiggle-woggle, flip-flap and
    the like are beyond the power of my magic to conjure up. Horizontal
    motion and a rotary giddiness I cannot claim to reproduce;
    my speciality is headlong descents, breathlessness and that delicious
    sickening feeling that your entrails have been left behind on an
    upper storey. Those who chafe at the tameness and sameness of
    office life, who pine for a little excitement to diversify the quotidian
    routine, should experiment with this little recipe of mine and
    bring the water-shoot into the counting-house. It is quite simple.
    All you have got to do is to pause for a moment in your work
    and ask yourself: Why am I doing this? What is it all for?
    Did I come into the world, supplied with a soul which may very
    likely be immortal, for the sole purpose of sitting every day at this
    desk? Ask yourself these questions thoughtfully, seriously.
    Reflect even for a moment on their significance—and I can
    guarantee that, firmly seated though you may be in your hard
    or your padded chair, you will feel all at once that the void has
    opened beneath you, that you are sliding headlong, fast and faster,
    into nothingness.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>For those who cannot dispense with formularies and fixed
    prayers, I recommend this little catechism, to be read through in
    office hours whenever time hangs a little heavy.</p>

    <p class='pindent'><span class='it'>Q.</span> Why am I working here?</p>

    <p class='pindent'><span class='it'>A.</span> In order that Jewish stockbrokers may exchange their
    Rovers for Armstrong-Siddeleys, buy the latest jazz records and
    spend the week-end at Brighton.</p>

    <p class='pindent'><span class='it'>Q.</span> Why do I go on working here?</p>

    <p class='pindent'><span class='it'>A.</span> In the hope that I too may some day be able to spend the
    week-end at Brighton.</p>

    <p class='pindent'><span class='it'>Q.</span> What is progress?</p>

    <p class='pindent'><span class='it'>A.</span> Progress is stockbrokers, more stockbrokers and still more
    stockbrokers.</p>

    <p class='pindent'><span class='it'>Q.</span> What is the aim of social reformers?</p>

    <p class='pindent'><span class='it'>A.</span> The aim of social reformers is to create a state in which
    every individual enjoys the greatest possible amount of freedom
    and leisure.</p>

    <p class='pindent'><span class='it'>Q.</span> What will the citizens of this reformed state do with their
    freedom and leisure?</p>

    <p class='pindent'><span class='it'>A.</span> They will do, presumably, what the stockbrokers do with
    these things to-day, <span class='it'>e.g.</span> spend the week-end at Brighton, ride
    rapidly in motor vehicles and go to the theatre.</p>

    <p class='pindent'><span class='it'>Q.</span> On what condition can I live a life of contentment?</p>

    <p class='pindent'><span class='it'>A.</span> On the condition that you do not think.</p>

    <p class='pindent'><span class='it'>Q.</span> What is the function of newspapers, cinemas, radios, motorbikes,
    jazz bands, etc?</p>

    <p class='pindent'><span class='it'>A.</span> The function of these things is the prevention of thought
    and the killing of time. They are the most powerful instruments
    of human happiness.</p>

    <p class='pindent'><span class='it'>Q.</span> What did Buddha consider the most deadly of the deadly sins?</p>

    <p class='pindent'><span class='it'>A.</span> Unawareness, stupidity.</p>

    <p class='pindent'><span class='it'>Q.</span> And what will happen if I make myself aware, if I actually
    begin to think?</p>

    <p class='pindent'><span class='it'>A.</span> Your swivel chair will turn into a trolley on the mountain
    railway, the office floor will gracefully slide away from beneath
    you and you will find yourself launched into the abyss.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Down, down, down! The sensation, though sickening, is
    really delightful. Most people, I know, find it a little too much
    for them and consequently cease to think, in which case the trolley
    reconverts itself into the swivel chair, the floor closes up and the
    hours at the desk seem once more to be hours passed in a perfectly
    reasonable manner; or else, more rarely, flee in panic horror from
    the office to bury their heads like ostriches in religion or what not.
    For a strong-minded and intelligent person both courses are
    inadmissible; the first because it is stupid and the second because
    it is cowardly. No self-respecting man can either accept unreflectingly
    or, having reflected upon it, irresponsibly run away
    from the reality of human life. The proper course, I flatter myself,
    is that which I have adopted. Having sought out the heart of
    reality—Gog’s Court, to be explicit—I have taken up my position
    there; and though fully aware of the nature of the reality
    by which I am surrounded, though deliberately keeping myself
    reminded of the complete imbecility of what I am doing, I
    yet remain heroically at my post. My whole time is passed
    on the switchback; all my life is one unceasing slide through
    nothing.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>All my life, I insist; for it is not merely into Gog’s Court
    that I magically introduce the fun of the fair. I so arrange my
    private life that I am sliding even out of office hours. My heart,
    to borrow the poetess’s words, is like a singing bird whose nest
    is permanently in a water-shoot. Miss Carruthers’s boardinghouse
    in Chelsea is, I assure you, as suitable a place to slither
    in as any east of Temple Bar. I have lived there now for four
    years. I am a pillar of the establishment and every evening,
    when I sit down to dinner with my fellow guests, I feel as though
    I were taking my place in a specially capacious family trolley on
    the switchback railway. All aboard! and away we go. With
    gathering momentum the trolley plunges down into vacancy.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Let me describe an evening on the Domestic water-shoot. At
    the head of the table sits Miss Carruthers herself; thirty-seven,
    plump though unmarried, with a face broadening towards the
    base and very flabby about the cheeks and chin—bull-doggy, in
    a word; and the snub nose, staring at you out of its upward-tilted
    nostrils, the small brown eyes do not belie the comparison. And
    what activity! never walks, but runs about her establishment like
    a demoniac, never speaks but shrilly shouts, carves the roast beef
    with scientific fury, laughs like a giant woodpecker. She belongs
    to a distinguished family which would never, in its days of glory,
    have dreamed of allowing one of its daughters to become what
    Miss Carruthers calls, applying to herself the most humiliating
    of titles and laughing as she does so, to emphasize the picturesque
    contrast between what she is by birth and what circumstance has
    reduced her to becoming, ‘a common lodging-house keeper.’
    She is a firm believer in her class, and to her more distinguished
    guests deplores the necessity under which she labours to admit
    into her establishment persons not really, really .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. She is
    careful not to mix people of different sorts together. Her most
    genteel guests sit the closest to her at table; it is implied that,
    in the neighbourhood of Miss Carruthers, they will feel at home.
    For years I have had the honour of sitting at her left hand; for
    if less prosperous than Mrs. Cloudesley Shove, the broker’s widow
    (who sits in glory on the right), I have at least attended in my
    youth an ancient seat of learning.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>The gong reverberates; punctually I hurry down to the dining-room.
    With fury and precision, like a conductor immersed in a
    Wagner overture, Miss Carruthers is carving the beef.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Evening, Mr. Chelifer,’ she loudly calls, without interrupting
    her labours. ‘What news have you brought back with you from
    the city to-day?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Affably I smile, professionally I rub the hands. ‘Well, I
    don’t know that I can think of any.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Evening, Mrs. Fox. Evening, Mr. Fox.’ The two old people
    take their places near the further end of the table. They are not
    quite, quite .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. ‘Evening, Miss Monad.’ Miss Monad does
    responsible secretarial work and sits next to the Fox’s. ‘Evening,
    Mr. Quinn. Evening, Miss Webber. Evening, Mrs. Crotch.’
    But the tone in which she responds to Mr. Dutt’s courteous greeting
    is much less affable. Mr. Dutt is an Indian—a black man, Miss
    Carruthers calls him. Her ‘Evening, Mr. Dutt’ shows that she
    knows her place and hopes that the man of the inferior race knows
    his. The servant comes in with a steaming dish of greens. <span class='it'>Crambe
    ripetita</span>—inspiring perfume! Mentally I burst into song.</p>

    <div class='poetry-container' style=''><div class='lgp'> <!-- rend=';' -->
    <p class='line0'>These like remorse inveterate memories,</p>
    <p class='line0'>Being of cabbage, are prophetic too</p>
    <p class='line0'>Of future feasts, when Mrs. Cloudesley Shove</p>
    <p class='line0'>Will still recall lamented Cloudesley.</p>
    <p class='line0'>&ensp;&ensp;&ensp;&ensp;&ensp;&ensp;&ensp;&ensp;&ensp;&ensp;&ensp;&ensp;&ensp;&ensp;&ensp;&ensp;&ensp;&ensp;&ensp;&ensp;&ensp;&ensp;&ensp;&ensp;&ensp;&ensp;&ensp;&ensp;&ensp;&ensp;&ensp;&ensp;&ensp;&ensp;&ensp;&ensp;&ensp;&ensp;Still</p>
    <p class='line0'>Among the moonlit cedars Philomel</p>
    <p class='line0'>Calls back to mind, again, again,</p>
    <p class='line0'>The ancient pain, the everlasting pain;</p>
    <p class='line0'>And still inveterately the haunted air</p>
    <p class='line0'>Remembers and foretells that roses were</p>
    <p class='line0'>Red and to-morrow will again be red,</p>
    <p class='line0'>But, ‘Cloudesley, Cloudesley!’ Philomel in vain</p>
    <p class='line0'>Sobs on the night; for Cloudesley Shove is dead.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.</p>
    </div></div> <!-- end poetry block --><!-- end rend -->

    <p class='pindent'>And in the flesh, as though irresistibly summoned by my incantation,
    Mrs. Cloudesley Shove blackens the doorway with her
    widowhood.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Not a very naice day,’ says Mrs. Cloudesley, as she sits down.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Not at all,’ Miss Carruthers heartily agrees. And then,
    without turning from the beef, without abating for an instant the
    celerity of her carving, ‘Fluffy!’ she shouts through the increasing
    din, ‘don’t giggle like that.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Politely Mr. Chelifer half raises himself from his chair as Miss
    Fluffy comes tumbling, on the tail end of her giggle, into the
    chair next to his. Always the perfect gent.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I wasn’t giggling, Miss Carruthers,’ Fluffy protests. Her
    smile reveals above the roots of her teeth a line of almost bloodless
    gums.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Quite true,’ says young Mr. Brimstone, following her less
    tumultuously from the door and establishing himself in the seat
    opposite, next to Mrs. Cloudesley. ‘She wasn’t giggling. She
    was merely cachinnating.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Everybody laughs uproariously, even Miss Carruthers, though
    she does not cease to carve. Mr. Brimstone remains perfectly
    grave. Behind his rimless pince-nez there is hardly so much as
    a twinkle. As for Miss Fluffy, she fairly collapses.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘What a horrible man!’ she screams through her laughter, as
    soon as she has breath enough to be articulate. And picking up
    her bread, she makes as though she were going to throw it across
    the table in Mr. Brimstone’s face.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Mr. Brimstone holds up a finger. ‘Now you be careful,’ he
    admonishes. ‘If you don’t behave, you’ll be put in the corner
    and sent to bed without your supper.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>There is a renewal of laughter.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Miss Carruthers intervenes. ‘Now don’t tease her, Mr.
    Brimstone.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Tease?’ says Mr. Brimstone, in the tone of one who has been
    misjudged. ‘But I was only applying moral suasion, Miss
    Carruthers.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Inimitable Brimstone! He is the life and soul of Miss Carruthers’s
    establishment. So serious, so clever, such an alert young
    city man—but withal so exquisitely waggish, so gallant! To
    see him with Fluffy—it’s as good as a play.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘There!’ says Miss Carruthers, putting down her carving
    tools with a clatter. Loudly, energetically, she addresses herself
    to her duties as a hostess. ‘I went to Buszard’s this afternoon,’
    she proclaims, not without pride. We old county families have
    always bought our chocolate at the best shops. ‘But it isn’t
    what it used to be.’ She shakes her head; the high old feudal
    times are past. ‘It isn’t the same. Not since the A B C took
    it over.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Do you see,’ asks Mr. Brimstone, becoming once more his
    serious self, ‘that the new Lyons Corner House in Piccadilly Circus
    will be able to serve fourteen million meals a year?’ Mr. Brimstone
    is always a mine of interesting statistics.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘No, really?’ Mrs. Cloudesley is astonished.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>But old Mr. Fox, who happens to have read the same evening
    paper as Mr. Brimstone, takes almost the whole credit of Mr.
    Brimstone’s erudition to himself by adding, before the other has
    time to say it: ‘Yes, and that’s just twice as many meals as any
    American restaurant can serve.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Good old England!’ cried Miss Carruthers patriotically.
    ‘These Yanks haven’t got us beaten in everything yet.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘So naice, I always think, these Corner Houses,’ says Mrs.
    Cloudesley. ‘And the music they play is really quite classical,
    you know, sometimes.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Quite,’ says Mr. Chelifer, savouring voluptuously the pleasure
    of dropping steeply from the edge of the convivial board into
    interstellar space.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘And so sumptuously decorated,’ Mrs. Cloudesley continues.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>But Mr. Brimstone knowingly lets her know that the marble
    on the walls is less than a quarter of an inch thick.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>And the conversation proceeds. ‘The Huns,’ says Miss
    Carruthers, ‘are only shamming dead.’ Mr. Fox is in favour of
    a business government. Mr. Brimstone would like to see a few
    strikers shot, to encourage the rest; Miss Carruthers agrees.
    From below the salt Miss Monad puts in a word for the working
    classes, but her remark is treated with the contempt it deserves.
    Mrs. Cloudesley finds Charlie Chaplin so vulgar, but likes Mary
    Pickford. Miss Fluffy thinks that the Prince of Wales ought to
    marry a nice simple English girl. Mr. Brimstone says something
    rather cutting about Mrs. Asquith and Lady Diana Manners. Mrs.
    Cloudesley, who has a profound knowledge of the Royal Family,
    mentions the Princess Alice. Contrapuntally to this, Miss Webber
    and Mr. Quinn have been discussing the latest plays and Mr.
    Chelifer has engaged Miss Fluffy in a conversation which soon
    occupies the attention of all the persons sitting at the upper end
    of the table—a conversation about flappers. Mrs. Cloudesley,
    Miss Carruthers and Mr. Brimstone agree that the modern girl
    is too laxly brought up. Miss Fluffy adheres in piercing tones to
    the opposite opinion. Mr. Brimstone makes some splendid jokes
    at the expense of co-education, and all concur in deploring cranks
    of every variety. Miss Carruthers, who has a short way with
    dissenters, would like to see them tarred and feathered—all except
    pacifists, who, like strikers, could do with a little shooting. Lymphatic
    Mrs. Cloudesley, with sudden and surprising ferocity, wants
    to treat the Irish in the same way. (Lamented Cloudesley had
    connections with Belfast.) But at this moment a deplorable
    incident occurs. Mr. Dutt, the Indian, who ought never, from
    his lower sphere, even to have listened to the conversation going on
    in the higher, leans forward and speaking loudly across the intervening
    gulf ardently espouses the Irish cause. His eloquence rolls
    up the table between two hedges of horrified silence. For a
    moment nothing can be heard but ardent nationalistic sentiments
    and the polite regurgitation of prune stones. In the presence of
    this shocking and unfamiliar phenomenon nobody knows exactly
    what to do. But Miss Carruthers rises, after the first moment,
    to the occasion.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Ah, but then, Mr. Dutt,’ she says, interrupting his tirade
    about oppressed nationalities, ‘you must remember that Mrs.
    Cloudesley Shove is English. <span class='it'>You</span> can hardly expect to understand
    what <span class='it'>she</span> feels. Can you?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>We all feel inclined to clap. Without waiting to hear Mr. Dutt’s
    reply, and leaving three prunes uneaten on her plate, Miss Carruthers
    gets up and sweeps with dignity towards the door. Loudly,
    in the corridor, she comments on the insolence of black men.
    And what ingratitude, too!</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘After I had made a special exception in his case to my rule
    against taking coloured people!’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>We all sympathize. In the drawing-room the conversation
    proceeds. Headlong the trolley plunges.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>A home away from home—that was how Miss Carruthers
    described her establishment in the prospectus. It was the awayness
    of it that first attracted me to the place. The vast awayness from
    what I had called home up till the time I first stayed there—that
    was what made me decide to settle for good at Miss Carruthers’s.
    From the house where I was born Miss Carruthers’s seemed about
    as remote as any place one could conveniently find.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I remember, I remember .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.’ It is a pointless and futile
    occupation, difficult none the less not to indulge in. I remember.
    Our house at Oxford was dark, spiky and tall. Ruskin himself, it
    was said, had planned it. The front windows looked out on to
    the Banbury Road. On rainy days, when I was a child, I used to
    spend whole mornings staring down into the thoroughfare. Every
    twenty minutes a tram-car drawn by two old horses, trotting in
    their sleep, passed with an undulating motion more slowly than a
    man could walk. The little garden at the back once seemed
    enormous and romantic, the rocking-horse in the nursery a beast
    like an elephant. The house is sold now and I am glad of it.
    They are dangerous, these things and places inhabited by memory.
    It is as though, by a process of metempsychosis, the soul of dead
    events goes out and lodges itself in a house, a flower, a landscape,
    in a group of trees seen from the train against the sky-line, an old
    snapshot, a broken pen-knife, a book, a perfume. In these memory-charged
    places, among these things haunted by the ghosts of dead
    days, one is tempted to brood too lovingly over the past, to live
    it again, more elaborately, more consciously, more beautifully
    and harmoniously, almost as though it were an imagined life in the
    future. Surrounded by these ghosts one can neglect the present
    in which one bodily lives. I am glad the place is sold; it was
    dangerous. <span class='it'>Evviva</span> Miss Carruthers!</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Nevertheless my thoughts, as I lay on the water that morning,
    reverted from the Home Away to the other home from which it
    was so distant. I recalled the last visit I had paid to the old house,
    a month or two since, just before my mother finally decided herself
    to move out. Mounting the steps that led up to the ogival
    porch I had felt like an excavator on the threshold of a tomb. I
    tugged at the wrought-iron bell pull; joints creaked, wires wheezily
    rattled, and far off, as though accidentally, by an afterthought,
    tinkled the cracked bell. In a moment the door would open, I
    should walk in, and there, there in the unrifled chamber the royal
    mummy would be lying—my own.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Nothing within those Gothic walls ever changed. Imperceptibly
    the furniture grew older; the wall-papers and the upholstery
    recalled with their non-committal russets and sage-greens the
    refinements of another epoch. And my mother herself, pale and
    grey-haired, draped in the dateless dove-grey dresses she had
    always worn, my mother was still the same. Her smile was the
    same dim gentle smile; her voice still softly modulated, like a
    studied and cultured music, from key to key. Her hair was hardly
    greyer—for it had whitened early and I was a late-born child—than
    I always remember it to have been. Her face was hardly
    more deeply wrinkled. She walked erect, seemed still as active
    as ever, she had grown no thinner and no stouter.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>And she was still surrounded by those troops of derelict dogs,
    so dreadfully profuse, poor beasts! in their smelly gratitude. There
    were still the same moth-eaten cats picked up starving at a street
    corner to be harboured in luxury—albeit on a diet that was, on
    principle, strictly vegetarian—in the best rooms of the house.
    Poor children still came for buns and tea and traditional games
    in the garden—so traditional, very often, that nobody but my
    mother had ever heard of them; still came, when the season
    happened to be winter, for gloves and woolly stockings and traditional
    games indoors. And the writing-table in the drawing-room
    was piled high, as it had always been piled, with printed
    appeals for some deserving charity. And still in her beautiful
    calligraphy my mother addressed the envelopes that were to contain
    them, slowly, one after another—and each a little work of art,
    like a page from a mediaeval missal, and each destined, without
    reprieve, to the waste-paper basket.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>All was just as it had always been. Ah, but not quite, all the
    same! For though the summer term was in full swing and the
    afternoon bright, the little garden behind the house was deserted
    and unmelodious. Where were the morris dancers, where the
    mixolydian strains? And remembering that music, those dances,
    those distant afternoons, I could have wept.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>In one corner of the lawn my mother used to sit at the little
    harmonium; I sat beside her to turn the pages of the music. In
    the opposite corner were grouped the dancers. My mother looked
    up over the top of the instrument; melodiously she inquired:</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Which dance shall we have next, Mr. Toft? “Trenchmore”?
    Or “Omnium Gatherum”? Or “John come kiss me now”?
    Or what do you say to “Up tails all”? Or “Rub her down with
    straw”? Or “An old man’s a bed full of bones”? Such an
    <span class='it'>embarras de richesse</span>, isn’t there?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>And Mr. Toft would break away from his little company of
    dancers and come across the lawn wiping his face—for ‘Hoite-cum-Toite’
    a moment before had been a most furious affair. It
    was a grey face with vague indeterminate features and a bright
    almost clerical smile in the middle of it. When he spoke it was
    in a very rich voice.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Suppose we try “Fading,” Mrs. Chelifer,’ he suggested.
    ‘ “Fading is a fine dance”—you remember the immortal words
    of the Citizen’s Wife in the <span class='it'>Knight of the Burning Pestle</span>? Ha
    ha!’ And he gave utterance to a little laugh, applausive of his
    own wit. For to Mr. Toft every literary allusion was a joke, and
    the obscurer the allusion the more exquisite the waggery. It
    was rarely, alas, that he found any one to share his merriment.
    My mother was one of the few people who always made a point
    of smiling whenever Mr. Toft laughed at himself. She smiled
    even when she could not track the allusion to its source. Sometimes
    she even went so far as to laugh. But my mother had no
    facility for laughter; by nature she was a grave and gentle smiler.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>And so ‘Fading’ it would be. My mother touched the keys
    and the gay, sad mixolydian air came snoring out of the harmonium
    like a strangely dissipated hymn tune. ‘One, two, three .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.’
    called Mr. Toft richly. And then in unison all five—the don,
    the two undergraduates, the two young ladies from North Oxford—would
    beat the ground with their feet, would prance and stamp
    till the garters of little bells round the gentlemen’s grey flannel
    trousers (it went without saying, for some reason, that the ladies
    should not wear them) jingled like the bells of a runaway hansom-cab
    horse. One, two, three.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. The Citizen’s Wife (ha ha!)
    was right. Fading is a fine dance indeed. Everybody dances
    Fading. Poor Mr. Toft had faded out of Oxford, had danced
    completely out of life, like Lycidas (tee-hee!) before his prime.
    Influenza had faded him. And of the undergraduates who had
    danced here, first and last, with Mr. Toft—how many of them
    had danced Fading under the German barrage? Young Flint,
    the one who used always to address his tutor as ‘Mr. Toft—oh,
    I mean Clarence’ (for Mr. Toft was one of those genial boyish
    dons who insisted on being called by their Christian names), young
    Flint was dead for certain. And Ramsden too, I had a notion
    that Ramsden too was dead.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>And then there were the young women from North Oxford.
    What, for example, of Miss Dewball’s cheeks? How had those
    cabbage roses weathered the passage of the years? But for Miss
    Higlett, of course, there could be no more fading, no further
    desiccation. She was already a harebell baked in sand. Unwithering
    Higlett, blowsy Dewball.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>And I myself, I too had faded. The Francis Chelifer who,
    standing by the dissipated harmonium, had turned the pages of
    his mother’s music, was as wholly extinct as Mr. Toft. Within
    this Gothic tomb reposed his mummy. My week-end visits were
    archaeological expeditions.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Now that poor Mr. Toft’s dead,’ I asked as we walked, my
    mother and I, that afternoon, up and down the little garden behind
    the house, ‘isn’t there any one else here who’s keen on morris
    dancing?’ Or were those folky days, I wondered, for ever past?</p>

    <p class='pindent'>My mother shook her head. ‘The enthusiasm for it is gone,’
    she said sadly. ‘This generation of undergraduates doesn’t
    seem to take much interest in that kind of thing. I don’t really
    know,’ she added, ‘what it <span class='it'>is</span> interested in.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>What indeed, I reflected. In my young days it had been Social
    Service and Fabianism; it had been long hearty walks in the
    country at four and a half miles an hour, with draughts of Five X
    beer at the end of them, and Rabelaisian song and conversations
    with yokels in incredibly picturesque little wayside inns; it had
    been reading parties in the Lakes and climbing in the Jura; it had
    been singing in the Bach Choir and even—though somehow I had
    never been able quite to rise to that—even morris dancing with
    Mr. Toft.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. But Fading is a fine dance, and all these occupations
    seemed now a little queer. Still, I caught myself envying the
    being who had lived within my skin and joined in these activities.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Poor Toft!’ I meditated. ‘Do you remember the way he
    had of calling great men by little pet names of his own? Just to
    show that he was on terms of familiarity with them, I suppose.
    Shakespeare was always Shake-bake, which was short, in its turn,
    for Shake-Bacon. And Oven, <span class='it'>tout court</span>, was Beethoven.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘And always J. S. B. for Bach,’ my mother continued, smiling
    elegiacally.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Yes, and Pee Em for Philipp Emanuel Bach. And Madame
    Dudevant for George Sand, or, alternatively, I remember, “The
    Queen’s Monthly Nurse”—because Dickens thought she looked
    like that the only time he saw her.’ I recalled the long-drawn and
    delighted laughter which used to follow that allusion.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘You were never much of a dancer, dear boy.’ My mother
    sadly shook her head over the past.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Ah, but at any rate,’ I answered, ‘at any rate I was a Fabian.
    And I went for hearty long walks in the country. I drank my pint
    of Five X at the Red Lion.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I wish you could have gone without the beer,’ said my mother.
    That I had not chosen to be a total abstainer had always a little
    distressed her. Moreover, I had a taste for beefsteaks.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘It was my substitute for morris dancing, if you follow me.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>But I don’t think she did follow me. We took two or three
    turns up and down the lawn in silence.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘How is your paper doing?’ she asked at last.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>I told her with a great show of enthusiasm about the cross
    between Angoras and Himalayans which we had just announced.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I often wish,’ she said after a pause, ‘that you had accepted
    the college’s offer. It would have been so good to have you here,
    filling the place your dear father occupied.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>She looked at me sadly. I smiled back at her as though from
    across a gulf. The child, I thought, grows up to forget that he
    is of the same flesh with his parents; but they do not forget. I
    wished, for her sake, that I were only five years old.</p>

    <h2>CHAPTER IV</h2>

    <p class='pindent'>At five years old, among other things, I used to write poems
    which my mother thoroughly and whole-heartedly enjoyed. There
    was one about larks which she still preserves, along with the locks
    of my pale childish hair, the faded photographs, the precocious
    drawings of railway trains and all the other relics of the period.</p>

    <div class='poetry-container' style=''><div class='lgp'> <!-- rend=';' -->
    <p class='line0'>Oh lark, how you do fly</p>
    <p class='line0'>Right up into the sky.</p>
    <p class='line0'>How loud he sings</p>
    <p class='line0'>And quickly wags his wings.</p>
    <p class='line0'>The sun does shine,</p>
    <p class='line0'>The weather is fine.</p>
    <p class='line0'>Father says, Hark,</p>
    <p class='line0'>Do you hear the lark?</p>
    </div></div> <!-- end poetry block --><!-- end rend -->

    <p class='noindent'>My mother likes that poem better, I believe, than anything I have
    written since. And I dare say that my father, if he had lived,
    would have shared her opinion. But then he was an ardent Wordsworthian.
    He knew most of the <span class='it'>Prelude</span> by heart. Sometimes, unexpectedly
    breaking that profound and god-like silence with which
    he always enveloped himself, he would quote a line or two. The
    effect was always portentous; it was as though an oracle had spoken.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>I remember with particular vividness one occasion when Wordsworth
    broke my father’s prodigious silence. It was one Easter
    time, when I was about twelve. We had gone to North Wales
    for the holidays; my father liked walking among hills and even
    amused himself occasionally with a little mild rock climbing.
    Easter was early that year, the season backward and inclement;
    there was snow on all the hills. On Easter Sunday my father,
    who considered a walk among the mountains as the equivalent of
    church-going, suggested that we should climb to the top of Snowdon.
    We started early; it was cold; white misty clouds shut off the
    distant prospects. Silently we trudged upwards through the
    snow. Like the page of King Wenceslas I followed in my father’s
    footsteps, treading in the holes he had kicked in the snow. Every
    now and then he would look round to see how I was getting on.
    Icy dewdrops hung in his brown beard. Gravely he smiled down
    on me as I came panting up, planting my small feet in his large
    tracks. He was a huge man, tall and broad-shouldered, with a
    face that might have been the curly-bearded original of one of
    those Greek busts of middle-aged statesmen or philosophers.
    Standing beside him, I always felt particularly small and insignificant.
    When I had come up with him, he would pat me affectionately
    on the shoulder with his large heavy hand, then turning his
    face towards the heights he addressed himself once more to the
    climb. Not a word was spoken.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>As the sun mounted higher, the clouds dispersed. Through the
    rifted mist we saw the sky. Great beams of yellow light went
    stalking across the slopes of snow. By the time we reached the
    summit the sky was completely clear; the landscape opened out
    beneath us. The sun was shining brightly, but without heat;
    the sky was pale blue, remote and icy. Every northern slope of
    the glittering hills was shadowed with transparent blues or purples.
    Far down, to the westward, was the scalloped and indented coast,
    and seeming in its remoteness utterly calm, the grey sea stretched
    upwards and away towards the horizon. We stood there for a
    long time in silence, gazing at the astonishing landscape. Sometimes,
    I remember, I stole an anxious look at my father. What
    was he thinking about? I wondered. Huge and formidable he
    stood there, leaning on his ice-axe, turning his dark bright eyes
    slowly and meditatively this way and that. He spoke no word.
    I did not dare to break the silence. In the end he straightened
    himself up. He raised his ice-axe and with an emphatic gesture
    dug the pointed ferrule into the snow. ‘Bloody fine!’ he said
    slowly in his deep, cavernous voice. He said no more. In silence
    we retraced our steps towards the Pen-y-pass Hotel.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>But my father had not, as I supposed, spoken his last word.
    When we were about half-way down I was startled and a little
    alarmed to hear him suddenly begin to speak. ‘For I have learned,’
    he began abruptly (and he seemed to be speaking less for my benefit
    than to himself), ‘to look on nature, not as in the hour of thoughtless
    youth; but hearing oftentimes the still sad music of humanity, not
    harsh, nor grating, but of ample power to chasten and subdue.
    And I have felt a presence that disturbs me with the joy of elevated
    thoughts; a sense sublime of something far more deeply interfused,
    whose dwelling is the light of setting suns and the round
    ocean and the living air, and the blue sky, and in the minds of men.’
    I listened to him with a kind of terror. The strange words (I had
    no idea at that time whence they came) reverberated mysteriously
    in my mind. It seemed an oracle, a divine revelation. My
    father ceased speaking as abruptly as he had begun. The words
    hung, as it were, isolated in the midst of his portentous silence.
    We walked on. My father spoke no more till on the threshold of
    the inn, sniffing the frozen air, he remarked with a profound
    satisfaction: ‘Onions!’ And then, after a second sniff: ‘Fried.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘A sense of something far more deeply interfused.’ Ever since
    that day those words, pronounced in my father’s cavernous voice,
    have rumbled through my mind. It took me a long time to discover
    that they were as meaningless as so many hiccoughs. Such
    is the nefarious influence of early training.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>My father, however, who never contrived to rid himself of the
    prejudices instilled into him in childhood, went on believing in
    his Wordsworthian formulas till the end. Yes, he too, I am afraid,
    would have preferred the precocious larks to my maturer lucubrations.
    And yet, how competently I have learned to write! In
    mere justice to myself I must insist on it. Not, of course, that it
    matters in the least. The larks might be my masterpiece; it would
    not matter a pin. Still, I insist. I insist.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.</p>

    <h2>CHAPTER V</h2>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Quite the little poet’—how bitterly poor Keats resented
    the remark! Perhaps because he secretly knew that it was just.
    For Keats, after all, was that strange, unhappy chimaera—a little
    artist and a large man. Between the writer of the Odes and the
    writer of the letters there is all the gulf that separates a halma
    player from a hero.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Personally, I do not go in for heroic letters. I only modestly
    lay claim to being a competent second-class halma player—but a
    good deal more competent, I insist (though of course it doesn’t
    matter), than when I wrote about the larks. ‘Quite the little
    poet’—always and, alas, incorrigibly I am that.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Let me offer you a specimen of my matured competence. I
    select it at random, as the reviewers say, from my long-projected
    and never-to-be-concluded series of poems on the first six Caesars.
    My father, I flatter myself, would have liked the title. That, at
    any rate, is thoroughly Wordsworthian; it is in the great tradition
    of that immortal ‘Needle Case in the form of a Harp.’ ‘Caligula
    crossing the bridge of boats between Baiae and Puteoli. By Peter
    Paul Rubens (b. 1577: d. 1640).’ The poem itself, however,
    is not very reminiscent of the Lake District.</p>

    <div class='poetry-container' style=''><div class='lgp'> <!-- rend=';' -->
    <p class='line0'>Prow after prow the floating ships</p>
    <p class='line0'>Bridge the blue gulph; the road is laid.</p>
    <p class='line0'>And Caesar on a piebald horse</p>
    <p class='line0'>Prances with all his cavalcade.</p>
    <p class='line'>&#160;</p>
    <p class='line0'>Drunk with their own quick blood they go.</p>
    <p class='line0'>The waves flash as with seeing eyes;</p>
    <p class='line0'>The tumbling cliffs mimic their speed,</p>
    <p class='line0'>And they have filled the vacant skies</p>
    <p class='line'>&#160;</p>
    <p class='line0'>With waltzing Gods and Virtues, set</p>
    <p class='line0'>The Sea Winds singing with their shout,</p>
    <p class='line0'>Made Vesta’s temple on the headland</p>
    <p class='line0'>Spin like a twinkling roundabout.</p>
    <p class='line'>&#160;</p>
    <p class='line0'>The twined caduceus in his hand,</p>
    <p class='line0'>And having golden wings for spurs,</p>
    <p class='line0'>Young Caesar dressed as God looks on</p>
    <p class='line0'>And cheers his jolly mariners;</p>
    <p class='line'>&#160;</p>
    <p class='line0'>Cheers as they heave from off the bridge</p>
    <p class='line0'>The trippers from the seaside town;</p>
    <p class='line0'>Laughs as they bang the bobbing heads</p>
    <p class='line0'>And shove them bubbling down to drown.</p>
    <p class='line'>&#160;</p>
    <p class='line0'>There sweeps a spiral whirl of gesture</p>
    <p class='line0'>From the allegoric sky:</p>
    <p class='line0'>Beauty, like conscious lightning, runs</p>
    <p class='line0'>Through Jove’s ribbed trunk and Juno’s thigh,</p>
    <p class='line'>&#160;</p>
    <p class='line0'>Slides down the flank of Mars and takes</p>
    <p class='line0'>From Virtue’s rump a dizzier twist,</p>
    <p class='line0'>Licks round a cloud and whirling stoops</p>
    <p class='line0'>Earthwards to Caesar’s lifted fist.</p>
    <p class='line'>&#160;</p>
    <p class='line0'>A burgess tumbles from the bridge</p>
    <p class='line0'>Headlong, and hurrying Beauty slips</p>
    <p class='line0'>From Caesar through the plunging legs</p>
    <p class='line0'>To the blue sea between the ships.</p>
    </div></div> <!-- end poetry block --><!-- end rend -->

    <p class='pindent'>Reading it through, I flatter myself that this is very nearly up
    to international halma form. A little more, and I shall be playing
    in critical test-matches against Monsieur Cocteau and Miss Amy
    Lowell. Enormous honour! I shrink from beneath its impendence.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>But ah! those Caesars. They have haunted me for years. I
    have had such schemes for putting half the universe into two or
    three dozen poems about those monsters. All the sins, to begin
    with, and complementarily all the virtues.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Art, science,
    history, religion—they too were to have found their place. And
    God knows what besides. But they never came to much, these
    Caesars. The notion, I soon came to see, was too large and pretentious
    ever to be realized. I began (deep calls to deep) with
    Nero, the artist. ‘Nero and Sporus walking in the gardens of the
    Golden House.’</p>

    <div class='poetry-container' style=''><div class='lgp'> <!-- rend=';' -->
    <p class='line0'>Dark stirrings in the perfumed air</p>
    <p class='line0'>Touch your cheeks, lift your hair.</p>
    <p class='line0'>With softer fingers I caress,</p>
    <p class='line0'>Sporus, all your loveliness.</p>
    <p class='line0'>Round as a fruit, tree-tangled, shines</p>
    <p class='line0'>The moon; and fire-flies in the vines,</p>
    <p class='line0'>Like stars in a delirious sky,</p>
    <p class='line0'>Gleam and go out. Unceasingly</p>
    <p class='line0'>The fountains fall, the nightingales</p>
    <p class='line0'>Sing. But time flows and love avails</p>
    <p class='line0'>Nothing. The Christians smoulder red;</p>
    <p class='line0'>Their brave blue-hearted flames are dead.</p>
    <p class='line0'>And you, sweet Sporus, you and I,</p>
    <p class='line0'>We too must die, we too must die.</p>
    </div></div> <!-- end poetry block --><!-- end rend -->

    <p class='noindent'>But the soliloquy which followed was couched in a more philosophic
    key. I set forth in it all the reasons for halma’s existence—reasons
    which, at the time when I composed the piece, I almost believed
    in still. One lives and learns. Meanwhile, here it is.</p>

    <div class='poetry-container' style=''><div class='lgp'> <!-- rend=';' -->
    <p class='line0'>The Christians by whose muddy light</p>
    <p class='line0'>Dimly, dimly I divine</p>
    <p class='line0'>Your eyes and see your pallid beauty</p>
    <p class='line0'>Like a pale night-primrose shine</p>
    <p class='line'>&#160;</p>
    <p class='line0'>Colourless in the dark, revere</p>
    <p class='line0'>A God who slowly died that they</p>
    <p class='line0'>Might suffer the less; who bore the pain</p>
    <p class='line0'>Of all time in a single day,</p>
    <p class='line'>&#160;</p>
    <p class='line0'>The pain of all men in a single</p>
    <p class='line0'>Wounded body and sad heart.</p>
    <p class='line'>&#160;</p>
    <p class='line0'>The yellow marble smooth as water</p>
    <p class='line0'>Builds me a Golden House; and there</p>
    <p class='line0'>The marble gods sleep in their strength</p>
    <p class='line0'>And the white Parian girls are fair.</p>
    <p class='line'>&#160;</p>
    <p class='line0'>Roses and waxen oleanders,</p>
    <p class='line0'>Green grape bunches and the flushed peach,—</p>
    <p class='line0'>All beautiful things I taste, touch, see,</p>
    <p class='line0'>Knowing, loving, becoming each.</p>
    <p class='line'>&#160;</p>
    <p class='line0'>The ship went down, my mother swam:</p>
    <p class='line0'>I wedded and myself was wed;</p>
    <p class='line0'>Old Claudius died of emperor-bane:</p>
    <p class='line0'>Old Seneca too slowly bled.</p>
    <p class='line'>&#160;</p>
    <p class='line0'>The wild beast and the victim both,</p>
    <p class='line0'>The ravisher and the wincing bride;</p>
    <p class='line0'>King of the world and a slave’s slave,</p>
    <p class='line0'>Terror-haunted, deified—</p>
    <p class='line'>&#160;</p>
    <p class='line0'>An artist, O sweet Sporus, an artist,</p>
    <p class='line0'>All these I am and needs must be.</p>
    <p class='line0'>Is the tune Lydian? I have loved you.</p>
    <p class='line0'>And you have heard my symphony</p>
    <p class='line'>&#160;</p>
    <p class='line0'>Of wailing voices and clashed brass,</p>
    <p class='line0'>With long shrill flutings that suspend</p>
    <p class='line0'>Pain o’er a muttering gulf of terrors,</p>
    <p class='line0'>And piercing breathless joys that end</p>
    <p class='line'>&#160;</p>
    <p class='line0'>In agony—could I have made</p>
    <p class='line0'>My song of Furies were the bane</p>
    <p class='line0'>Still sap within the hemlock stalk,</p>
    <p class='line0'>The red swords virgin bright again?</p>
    <p class='line'>&#160;</p>
    <p class='line0'>Or take a child’s love that is all</p>
    <p class='line0'>Worship, all tenderness and trust,</p>
    <p class='line0'>A dawn-web, dewy and fragile—take</p>
    <p class='line0'>And with the violence of lust</p>
    <p class='line'>&#160;</p>
    <p class='line0'>Tear and defile it. You shall hear</p>
    <p class='line0'>The breaking dumbness and the thin</p>
    <p class='line0'>Harsh crying that is the very music</p>
    <p class='line0'>Of shame and the remorse of sin.</p>
    <p class='line'>&#160;</p>
    <p class='line0'>Christ died; the artist lives for all;</p>
    <p class='line0'>Loves, and his naked marbles stand</p>
    <p class='line0'>Pure as a column on the sky,</p>
    <p class='line0'>Whose lips, whose breast and thighs demand</p>
    <p class='line'>&#160;</p>
    <p class='line0'>Not our humiliation, not</p>
    <p class='line0'>The shuddering of an after shame;</p>
    <p class='line0'>And of his agonies men know</p>
    <p class='line0'>Only the beauty born of them.</p>
    <p class='line'>&#160;</p>
    <p class='line0'>Christ died, but living Nero turns</p>
    <p class='line0'>Your mute remorse to song; he gives</p>
    <p class='line0'>To idiot fate eyes like a lover’s,</p>
    <p class='line0'>And while his music plays, God lives.</p>
    </div></div> <!-- end poetry block --><!-- end rend -->

    <p class='noindent'>Romantic and noble sentiments! I protest, they do me credit.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>And then there are the fragments about Tiberius; Tiberius,
    need I add, the representative in my symbolic scheme of love.
    Here is one. ‘In the gardens at Capri.’ (All my scenes are
    laid in gardens, I notice, at night, under the moon. Perhaps the
    fact is significant. Who knows?)</p>

    <div class='poetry-container' style=''><div class='lgp'> <!-- rend=';' -->
    <p class='line0'>Hour after hour the stars</p>
    <p class='line0'>Move, and the moon towards remoter night</p>
    <p class='line0'>Averts her cheek.</p>
    <p class='line0'>Blind now, these gardens yet remember</p>
    <p class='line0'>That there were crimson petals glossy with light,</p>
    <p class='line0'>And their remembrance is this scent of roses.</p>
    <p class='line0'>Hour after hour the stars march slowly on,</p>
    <p class='line0'>And year by year mysteriously the flowers</p>
    <p class='line0'>Unfold the same bright pattern towards the sky.</p>
    <p class='line'>&#160;</p>
    <p class='line0'>Incurious under the streaming stars,</p>
    <p class='line0'>Breathing this new yet immemorial perfume</p>
    <p class='line0'>Unmoved, I lie along the tumbled bed;</p>
    <p class='line0'>And the two women who are my bedfellows,</p>
    <p class='line0'>Whose breath is sour with wine and their soft bodies</p>
    <p class='line0'>Still hot and rank, sleep drunkenly at my side.</p>
    </div></div> <!-- end poetry block --><!-- end rend -->

    <p class='noindent'>Commendable, I should now think, this fixture of the attention
    upon the relevant, the human reality in the centre of the pointless
    landscape. It was just at the time I wrote this fragment that I
    was learning the difficult art of this exclusive concentration on
    the relevant. They were painful lessons. War had prepared
    me to receive them; Love was the lecturer.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Her name was Barbara Waters. I saw her first when I was
    about fourteen. She was a month or two older than I. It was
    at one of those enormous water picnics on the Cherwell that were
    organized from time to time during the summer vacation by certain
    fiery and energetic spirits among the dons’ wives. We would
    start out at seven, half a dozen punt-loads of us, from the most
    northerly of the Oxford boat-houses and make our way up-stream
    for an hour or so until night had fairly set in. Then, disembarking
    in some solitary meadow, we would spread cloths, unpack hampers,
    eat hilariously. And there were so many midges that even the
    schoolboys were allowed to smoke cigarettes to keep them off—even
    the schoolgirls. And how knowingly and with what a relish
    we, the boys, puffed away, blowing the smoke through our noses,
    opening our mouths like frogs to make rings! But the girls
    always managed to make their cigarettes come to pieces, got the
    tobacco into their mouths and, making faces, had to pick the bitter-tasting
    threads of it from between their lips. In the end, after
    much giggling, they always threw their cigarettes away, not half
    smoked; the boys laughed, contemptuously and patronizingly.
    And finally we packed ourselves into the punts again and floated
    home, singing; our voices across the water sounded praeter-naturally
    sweet. A yellow moon as large as a pumpkin shone
    overhead; there were gleamings on the crests of the ripples and
    in the troughs of the tiny waves, left in the wake of the punts,
    shadows of almost absolute blackness. The leaves of the willow
    trees shone like metal. A white mist lay along the meadows.
    Corncrakes incessantly ran their thumbs along the teeth of combs.
    A faint weedy smell came up from the river; the aroma of tobacco
    cut violently across it in pungent gusts; sometimes the sweet
    animal smell of cows insinuated itself into the watery atmosphere,
    and looking between the willows, we would see a company of the
    large and gentle beasts kneeling in the grass, their heads and backs
    projecting like the crests of mountains above the mist, still hard at
    work, though the laborious day was long since over, chewing and
    chewing away at a green breakfast that had merged into luncheon,
    at the tea that had become in due course a long-drawn-out vegetarian
    dinner. Munchily, squelchily, they moved their indefatigable
    jaws. The sound came faintly to us through the silence. Then
    a small clear voice would begin singing ‘Drink to me only with
    thine eyes’ or ‘Greensleeves.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Sometimes, for the fun of the thing, though it was quite unnecessary,
    and if the weather happened to be really warm, positively
    disagreeable, we would light a fire, so that we might have the
    pleasure of eating our cold chicken and salmon mayonnaise with
    potatoes baked—or generally either half baked or burnt—in their
    jackets among the glowing cinders. It was by the light of one
    of these fires that I first saw Barbara. The punt in which I came
    had started some little time after the others; we had had to wait
    for a late arrival. By the time we reached the appointed supping
    place the others had disembarked and made all ready for the meal.
    The younger members of the party had collected materials for a
    fire, which they were just lighting as we approached. A group
    of figures, pale and colourless in the moonlight, were standing or
    sitting round the white cloth. In the black shadow of a huge
    elm tree a few yards further off moved featureless silhouettes.
    Suddenly a small flame spurted from a match and was shielded
    between a pair of hands that were transformed at once into hands
    of transparent coral. The silhouettes began to live a fragmentary
    life. The fire-bearing hands moved round the pyre; two or
    three new little flames were born. Then, to the sound of a great
    hurrah, the bonfire flared up. In the heart of the black shadow
    of the elm tree a new small universe, far vivider than the ghostly
    world of moonlight beyond, was suddenly created. By the light
    of the bright flames I saw half a dozen familiar faces belonging to
    the boys and girls I knew. But I hardly noticed them; I heeded
    only one face, a face I did not know. The leaping flame revealed
    it apocalyptically. Flushed, bright and with an air of being
    almost supernaturally alive in the quivering, changing light of the
    flames, it detached itself with an incredible clarity and precision
    from against a background of darkness which the fire had made
    to seem yet darker. It was the face of a young girl. She had
    dark hair with ruddy golden lights in it. The nose was faintly
    aquiline. The openings of the eyes were narrow, long and rather
    slanting, and the dark eyes looked out through them as though
    through mysterious loopholes, brilliant, between the fringed
    eyelids, with an intense and secret and unutterable happiness.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>The mouth seemed to share in the same exquisite secret. Not
    full, but delicately shaped, the unparted lips were curved into a
    smile that seemed to express a delight more piercing than any
    laughter, any outburst of joy could give utterance to. The corners
    of the mouth were drawn upwards so that the line of the meeting
    of the lips was parallel with her tilted eyes. And this slanting
    close-lipped smile seemed as though suspended on two little folds
    that wrinkled the cheeks at the corners of the mouth. The face,
    which was rather broad across the cheek-bones, tapered away to a
    pointed chin, small and firm. Her neck was round and slender;
    her arms, which were bare in her muslin dress, very thin.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>The punt moved slowly against the current. I gazed and gazed
    at the face revealed by the flickering light of the fire. It seemed
    to me that I had never seen anything so beautiful and wonderful.
    What was the secret of that inexpressible joy? What nameless
    happiness dwelt behind those dark-fringed eyes, that silent, unemphatic,
    close-lipped smile? Breathlessly I gazed. I felt the
    tears coming into my eyes—she was so beautiful. And I was
    almost awed, I felt something that was almost fear, as though I
    had suddenly come into the presence of more than a mere mortal
    being, into the presence of life itself. The flame leapt up. Over
    the silent, secret-smiling face the tawny reflections came and went,
    as though wild blood were fluttering deliriously beneath the skin.
    The others were shouting, laughing, waving their arms. She
    remained perfectly still, close-lipped and narrow-eyed, smiling.
    Yes, life itself was standing there.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>The punt bumped against the bank. ‘Catch hold,’ somebody
    shouted, ‘catch hold, Francis.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Reluctantly I did as I was told; I felt as though something
    precious were being killed within me.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>In the years that followed I saw her once or twice. She was
    an orphan, I learned, and had relations in Oxford with whom she
    came occasionally to stay. When I tried to speak to her, I always
    found myself too shy to do more than stammer or say something
    trivial or stupid. Serenely, looking at me steadily between her
    eyelids, she answered. I remember not so much what she said as
    the tone in which she spoke—cool, calm, assured, as befitted the
    embodiment of life itself.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Do you play tennis?’ I would ask in desperation—and I could
    have wept at my own stupidity and lack of courage. Why are
    you so beautiful? What do you think about behind your secret
    eyes? Why are you so inexplicably happy? Those were the
    questions I wanted to ask her.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Yes, I love tennis,’ she gravely answered.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Once, I remember, I managed to advance so far along the road
    of coherent and intelligent conversation as to ask her what books
    she liked best. She looked at me unwaveringly while I spoke.
    It was I who reddened and turned away. She had an unfair
    advantage ever me—the advantage of being able to look out from
    between her narrowed eyelids as though from an ambush. I was
    in the open and utterly without protection.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I don’t read much,’ she said at last, when I had finished. ‘I
    don’t really very much like reading.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>My attempt to approach, to make contact, was baffled. At the
    same time I felt that I ought to have known that she wouldn’t
    like reading. After all, what need was there for her to read?
    When one is life itself, one has no use for mere books. Years
    later she admitted that she had always made an exception for the
    novels of Gene Stratton-Porter. When I was seventeen she went
    to live with another set of relations in South Africa.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Time passed. I thought of her constantly. All that I read
    of love in the poets arranged itself significantly round the memory
    of that lovely and secretly smiling face. My friends would boast
    about their little adventures. I smiled unenviously, knowing not
    merely in theory but by actual experience that that sort of thing
    was not love. Once, when I was a freshman at the university, I
    myself, at the end of a tipsy evening in a night club, lapsed from
    the purity in which I had lived up till then. Afterwards, I was
    horribly ashamed. And I felt that I had made myself unworthy
    of love. In consequence—the link of cause and effect seems to me
    now somewhat difficult to discover, but at the time, I know, I
    found my action logical enough—in consequence I overworked
    myself, won two university prizes, became an ardent revolutionary
    and devoted many hours of my leisure to ‘social service’ in the
    college Mission. I was not a good social servant, got on only
    indifferently well with fierce young adolescents from the slums and
    thoroughly disliked every moment I spent in the Mission. But
    it was precisely for that reason that I stuck to the job. Once or
    twice, even, I consented to join in the morris dancing in my mother’s
    garden. I was making myself worthy—for what? I hardly
    know. The possibility of marriage seemed almost infinitely
    remote; and somehow I hardly desired it. I was fitting myself
    to go on loving and loving, and incidentally to do great things.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Then came the war. From France I wrote her a letter, in
    which I told her all the things I had lacked the power to say in
    her presence. I sent the letter to the only address I knew—she
    had left it years before—not expecting, not even hoping very much,
    that she would receive it. I wrote it for my own satisfaction, in
    order to make explicit all that I felt. I had no doubt that I should
    soon be dead. It was a letter addressed not so much to a woman
    as to God, a letter of explanation and apology posted to the universe.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>In the winter of 1916 I was wounded. At the end of my spell
    in hospital I was reported unfit for further active service and
    appointed to a post in the contracts department of the Air Board.
    I was put in charge of chemicals, celluloid, rubber tubing, castor
    oil, linen and balloon fabrics. I spent my time haggling with
    German Jews over the price of chemicals and celluloid, with Greek
    brokers over the castor oil, with Ulstermen over the linen. Spectacled
    Japanese came to visit me with samples of crêpe de Chine
    which they tried to persuade me—and they offered choice cigars—would
    be both better and cheaper than cotton for the manufacture
    of balloons. Of every one of the letters I dictated first eleven,
    then seventeen, and finally, when the department had flowered to
    the height of its prosperity, twenty-two copies were made, to be
    noted and filed by the various sub-sections of the ministry concerned.
    The Hotel Cecil was filled with clerks. In basements two stories
    down beneath the surface of the ground, in attics above the level
    of the surrounding chimney-pots, hundreds of young women tapped
    away at typewriters. In a subterranean ball-room, that looked like
    the setting for Belshazzar’s feast, a thousand cheap lunches were
    daily consumed. In the hotel’s best bedrooms overlooking the
    Thames sat the professional civil servants of long standing with
    letters after their names, the big business men who were helping to
    win the war, the staff officers. A fleet of very large motor cars
    waited for them in the courtyard. Sometimes, when I entered the
    office of a morning, I used to imagine myself a visitor from Mars.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>One morning—it was after I had been at the Air Board for
    several months—I found myself faced with a problem which could
    only be solved after consultation with an expert in the Naval Department.
    The naval people lived in the range of buildings on the
    opposite side of the courtyard from that in which our offices were
    housed. It was only after ten minutes of labyrinthine wanderings
    that I at last managed to find the man I was looking for. He was
    a genial fellow, I remember; asked me how I liked Bolo House
    (which was the nickname among the knowing of our precious Air
    Board office), gave me an East Indian cheroot and even offered
    whiskey and soda. After that we settled down to a technical chat
    about non-inflammable celluloid. I left him at last, much enlightened.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘So long,’ he called after me. ‘And if ever you want to know
    any mortal thing about acetone or any other kind of bloody dope,
    come to me and I’ll tell you.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Thanks,’ I said. ‘And if by any chance you should happen
    to want to know about Apollonius Rhodius, shall we say, or Chaucer,
    or the history of the three-pronged fork .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>He roared very heartily. ‘I’ll come to you,’ he concluded.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Still laughing, I shut the door behind me and stepped out into
    the corridor. A young woman was hurrying past with a thick
    bundle of papers in her hand, humming softly as she went. Startled
    by my sudden emergence, she turned and looked at me. As though
    with fear, my heart gave a sudden thump, then seemed to stop
    for a moment altogether, seemed to drop down within me.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Barbara!’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>At the sound of the name she halted and looked at me with
    that steady unwavering gaze between the narrowed eyelids that I
    knew so well. A little frown appeared on her forehead; puzzled,
    she pursed her lips. Then all at once her face brightened, she
    laughed; the light in the dark eyes joyously quivered and danced.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Why, it’s Francis Chelifer,’ she exclaimed. ‘I didn’t know
    you for the first minute. You’ve changed.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘You haven’t,’ I said. ‘You’re just the same.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>She said nothing, but smiled, close-lipped, and from between
    her lashes looked at me as though from an ambush. In her young
    maturity she was more beautiful than ever. Whether I was glad
    or sorry to see her again, I hardly know. But I do know that I
    was moved, profoundly; I was shaken and troubled out of whatever
    equanimity I possessed. That memory of a kind of symbolic
    loveliness for which and by which I had been living all these years
    was now reincarnated and stood before me, no longer a symbol,
    but an individual; it was enough to make one feel afraid.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I thought you were in South Africa,’ I went on. ‘Which is
    almost the same as saying I thought you didn’t exist.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I came home a year ago.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘And you’ve been working here ever since?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Barbara nodded.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘And you’re working in Bolo House too?’ she asked.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘For the last six months.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Well I never! And to think we never met before! But how
    small the world is—how absurdly small.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>We met for luncheon.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Did you get my letter?’ I summoned up courage to ask her
    over the coffee.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Barbara nodded. ‘It was months and months on its way,’ she
    said; and I did not know whether she made the remark deliberately,
    in order to stave off for a moment the inevitable discussion
    of the letter, or if she made it quite spontaneously and without
    afterthought, because she found it interesting that the letter should
    have been so long on its way. ‘It went to South Africa and back
    again,’ she explained.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Did you read it?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Of course.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Did you understand what I meant?’ As I asked the question
    I wished that I had kept silence. I was afraid of what the answer
    might be.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>She nodded and said nothing, looking at me mysteriously, as
    though she had a secret and profound comprehension of everything.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘It was something almost inexpressible,’ I said. Her look
    encouraged me to go on. ‘Something so deep and so vast that
    there were no words to describe it. You understood? You
    really understood?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Barbara was silent for some time. Then with a little sigh she
    said: ‘Men are always silly about me. I don’t know why.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>I looked at her. Could she really have uttered those words?
    She was still smiling as life itself might smile. And at that moment
    I had a horrible premonition of what I was going to suffer. Nevertheless
    I asked how soon I might see her again. To-night?
    Could she dine with me to-night? Barbara shook her head; this
    evening she was engaged. What about lunch to-morrow? ‘I
    must think.’ And she frowned, she pursed her lips. No, she
    remembered in the end, to-morrow was no good. Her first
    moment of liberty was at dinner-time two days later.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>I returned to my work that afternoon feeling particularly
    Martian. Eight thick files relating to the Imperial Cellulose
    Company lay on my desk. My secretary showed me the experts’
    report on proprietary brands of castor oil, which had just come in.
    A rubber tubing man was particularly anxious to see me. And
    did I still want her to get a trunk call through to Belfast about that
    linen business? Pensively I listened to what she was saying.
    What was it all for?</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Are men often silly about you, Miss Masson?’ it suddenly
    occurred to me to ask. I looked up at my secretary, who was
    waiting for me to answer her questions and tell her what to do.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Miss Masson became surprisingly red and laughed in an embarrassed,
    unnatural way. ‘Why, no,’ she said. ‘I suppose I’m
    an ugly duckling.’ And she added: ‘It’s rather a relief. But
    what makes you ask?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>She had reddish hair, bobbed and curly, a very white skin and
    brown eyes. About twenty-three, I supposed; and she wasn’t an
    ugly duckling at all. I had never talked to her except about
    business, and seldom looked at her closely, contenting myself with
    being merely aware that she was there—a secretary, most efficient.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘What makes you ask?’ A strange expression that was like a
    look of terror came into Miss Masson’s eyes.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Oh, I don’t know. Curiosity. Perhaps you’ll see if you
    can get me through to Belfast some time in the afternoon. And
    tell the rubber tubing man that I can’t possibly see him.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Miss Masson’s manner changed. She smiled at me efficiently,
    secretarially. Her eyes became quite impassive. ‘You can’t possibly
    see him,’ she repeated. She had a habit of repeating what
    other people had just said, even reproducing like an echo opinions
    or jokes uttered an instant before as though they were her own. She
    turned away and walked towards the door. I was left alone with
    the secret history of the Imperial Cellulose Company, the experts’
    report on proprietary brands of castor oil, and my own thoughts.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Two days later Barbara and I were dining very expensively at
    a restaurant where the diners were able very successfully to forget
    that the submarine campaign was in full swing and that food was
    being rationed.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I think the decorations are so pretty,’ she said, looking round
    her. ‘And the music.’ (Mrs. Cloudesley Shove thought the
    same of the Corner Houses.)</p>

    <p class='pindent'>While she looked round at the architecture, I looked at her.
    She was wearing a rose-coloured evening dress, cut low and without
    sleeves. The skin of her neck and shoulders was very white.
    There was a bright rose in the opening of her corsage. Her arms
    without being bony were still very slender, like the arms of a
    little girl; her whole figure was slim and adolescent.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Why do you stare at me like that?’ she asked, when the
    fascination of the architecture was exhausted. She had heightened
    the colour of her cheeks and faintly smiling lips. Between the
    darkened eyelids her eyes looked brighter than usual.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I was wondering why you were so happy. Secretly happy,
    inside, all by yourself. What’s the secret? That’s what I was
    wondering.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Why shouldn’t I be happy?’ she asked. ‘But, as a matter
    of fact,’ she added an instant later, ‘I’m not happy. How can
    one be happy when thousands of people are being killed every
    minute and millions more are suffering?’ She tried to look
    grave, as though she were in church. But the secret joy glittered
    irrepressibly through the slanting narrow openings of her eyes.
    Within its ambush her soul kept incessant holiday.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>I could not help laughing. ‘Luckily,’ I said, ‘our sympathy
    for suffering is rarely strong enough to prevent us from eating
    dinner. Do you prefer lobster or salmon?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Lobster,’ said Barbara. ‘But how stupidly cynical you are!
    You don’t believe what I say. But I do assure you, there’s not
    a moment when I don’t remember all those killed and wounded.
    And poor people too: the way they live—in the slums. One can’t
    be happy. Not really.’ She shook her head.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>I saw that if I pursued this subject of conversation, thus forcing
    her to continue her pretence of being in church, I should ruin
    her evening and make her thoroughly dislike me. The waiter
    with the wine list made a timely diversion. I skimmed the
    pages. ‘What do you say to a quart of champagne cup?’ I
    suggested.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘That would be delicious,’ she said, and was silent, looking at
    me meanwhile with a questioning, undecided face that did not
    know how to adjust itself—whether to continued gravity or to a
    more natural cheerfulness.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>I put an end to her indecision by pointing to a diner at a neighbouring
    table and whispering: ‘Have you ever seen anything
    so like a tapir?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>She burst into a peal of delighted laughter; not so much because
    what I had said was particularly funny, but because it was such
    a tremendous relief to be allowed to laugh again with a good
    conscience.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Or wouldn’t you have said an ant-eater?’ she suggested,
    looking in the direction I had indicated and then leaning across
    the table to speak the words softly and intimately into my ear.
    Her face approached, dazzlingly beautiful. I could have cried
    aloud. The secret happiness in her eyes was youth, was health,
    was uncontrollable life. The close lips smiled with a joyful sense
    of power. A rosy perfume surrounded her. The red rose between
    her breasts was brilliant against the white skin. I was
    aware suddenly that under the glossy silk of her dress was a young
    body, naked. Was it for this discovery that I had been preparing
    myself all these years?</p>

    <p class='pindent'>After dinner we went to a music hall, and when the show was
    over to a night club where we danced. She told me that she went
    dancing almost every night. I did not ask with whom. She
    looked appraisingly at all the women who came in, asked me if I
    didn’t think this one very pretty, that most awfully attractive; and
    when, on the contrary, I found them rather repulsive, she was
    annoyed with me for being insufficiently appreciative of her sex.
    She pointed out a red-haired woman at another table and asked me
    if I liked women with red hair. When I said that I preferred
    Buckle’s <span class='it'>History of Civilization</span>, she laughed as though I had said
    something quite absurdly paradoxical. It was better when she
    kept silence; and fortunately she had a great capacity for silence,
    could use it even as a defensive weapon, as when, to questions that
    at all embarrassed or nonplussed her, she simply returned no
    answer, however often they were repeated, smiling all the time
    mysteriously and as though from out of another universe.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>We had been at the night club about an hour, when a stoutish
    and flabby young man, very black-haired, very dark-skinned, with
    a large fleshy nose and a nostril curved in an opulent oriental
    volute, came sauntering in with a lordly air of possession. He
    wore a silver monocle in his left eye, and among the irrepressible
    black stubbles of his chin the grains of poudre de riz glittered
    like little snowflakes. Catching sight of Barbara he smiled,
    lavishly, came up to our table and spoke to her. Barbara seemed
    very glad to see him.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Such a clever man,’ she explained, when he had moved away
    to another table with the red-haired lady to whom I preferred
    the <span class='it'>History of Civilization</span>. ‘He’s a Syrian. You ought to get
    to know him. He writes poetry too, you know.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>I was unhappy the whole evening; but at the same time I wished
    it would never end. I should have liked to go on for ever sitting
    in that stuffy cellar, where the jazz band sounded so loud that it
    seemed to be playing inside one’s head. I would have breathed
    the stale air and wearily danced for ever, I would even have listened
    for ever to Barbara’s conversation—for ever, so that I might have
    been allowed to be near her, to look at her, to speculate, until she
    next spoke, on the profound and lovely mysteries behind her eyes,
    on the ineffable sources of that secret joy which kept her faintly
    and yet how intently and how rapturously smiling.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>The weeks passed. I saw her almost every day. And every
    day I loved her more violently and painfully, with a love that less
    and less resembled the religious passion of my boyhood. But it
    was the persistent memory of that passion which made my present
    desire so parching and tormenting, that filled me with a thirst
    that no possible possession could assuage. No possible possession,
    since whatever I might possess, as I realized more and more clearly
    each time I saw her, would be utterly different from what I had
    desired all these years to possess. I had desired all beauty, all
    that exists of goodness and truth, symbolized and incarnate in one
    face. And now the face drew near, the lips touched mine; and
    what I had got was simply a young woman with a ‘temperament,’
    as the euphemists who deplore the word admiringly and lovingly
    qualify the lascivious thing. And yet, against all reason, in spite
    of all the evidence, I could not help believing that she was somehow
    and secretly what I had imagined her. My love for her as a symbol
    strengthened my desire for her as an individual woman.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>All this, were it to happen to me now, would seem perfectly
    natural and normal. If I were to make love to a young woman, I
    should know precisely what I was making love to. But that, in
    those days, was something I still had to learn. In Barbara’s
    company I was learning it with a vengeance. I was learning that
    it is possible to be profoundly and slavishly in love with some one
    for whom one has no esteem, whom one does not like, whom one
    regards as a bad character and who, finally, not only makes one
    unhappy but bores one. And why not, I might now ask, why
    not? That things should be like this is probably the most natural
    thing in the world. But in those days I imagined that love ought
    always to be mixed up with affection and admiration, with worship
    and an intellectual rapture, as unflagging as that which one experiences
    during the playing of a symphony. Sometimes, no doubt,
    love does get involved with some or all of these things; sometimes
    these things exist by themselves, apart from love. But one must
    be prepared to swallow one’s love completely neat and unadulterated.
    It is a fiery, crude and somewhat poisonous draught.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Every hour I spent with Barbara brought fresh evidence of her
    inability to play the ideal part my imagination had all these years
    been assigning to her. She was selfish, thirsty for pleasures of
    the most vulgar sort, liked to bask in an atmosphere of erotic
    admiration, amused herself by collecting adorers and treating
    them badly, was stupid and a liar—in other words, was one of the
    normal types of healthy young womanhood. I should have been
    less disturbed by these discoveries if only her face had been different.
    Unfortunately, however, the healthy young woman who now
    revealed herself had the same features as that symbolic child on
    the memory of whose face I had brooded through all an ardent
    adolescence. And the contrast between what she was and what—with
    that dazzling and mysteriously lovely face—she ought to have
    been, what in my imagination she indeed had been, was a perpetual
    source of surprise and pain. And at the same time the nature of
    my passion for her had changed—changed inevitably and profoundly,
    the moment she ceased to be a symbol and became an
    individual. Now, I desired her; before, I had loved her for God’s
    sake and almost as though she were herself divine. And contrasting
    this new love with the love I had felt before, I was ashamed,
    I fancied myself unworthy, base, an animal. And I tried to
    persuade myself that if she seemed different it was because I felt
    differently and less nobly towards her. And sometimes, when we
    sat silent through long summer twilights under the trees in the
    Park, or at my Chelsea rooms, looking out on to the river, I could
    persuade myself for a precarious moment that Barbara was what
    she had been in my imagination and that I felt towards her now
    what I had felt towards the memory of her. In the end, however,
    Barbara would break the magic silence and with it the illusion.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘It’s such a pity,’ she would say pensively, ‘that July hasn’t
    got an r in it. Otherwise we might have had supper in an oyster
    bar.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Or else, remembering that I was a literary man, she would
    look at the gaudy remains of the sunset and sigh. ‘I wish <span class='it'>I</span> were
    a poet,’ she would say.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>And I was back again among the facts, and Barbara was once
    more a tangible young woman who bored me, but whom I desired—with
    what a definite and localized longing!—to kiss, to hold
    fast and caress.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>It was a longing which, for some time, I rigorously suppressed.
    I fought against it as against an evil thing, too horribly unlike my
    previous love, too outrageously incompatible with my conception
    of Barbara’s higher nature. I had not yet learned to reconcile
    myself to the fact that Barbara’s higher nature was an invention
    of my own, a figment of my proper imagination.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>One very hot evening in July I drove her to the door of the
    house in Regent Square, Bloomsbury, in which she occupied a little
    flat under the roof. We had been dancing and it was late; a
    hunch-backed moon had climbed a third of the way up the sky
    and was shining down into the square over the shoulder of the
    church that stands on its eastern side. I paid off the cabman and
    we were left alone on the pavement. I had been bored and irritated
    the whole evening; but at the thought that I should have to bid
    her good-night and walk off by myself I was filled with such an
    anguish that the tears came into my eyes. I stood there in silent
    irresolution, looking into her face. It was calmly and mysteriously
    smiling as though to itself and for some secret reason; her eyes
    were very bright. She too was silent, not restlessly, not irresolutely
    as I was silent, but easily, with a kind of majesty. She could
    live in silence, when she so desired, like a being in its proper
    element.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Well,’ I brought myself to say at last, ‘I must go.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Why not come in for a final cup of tea?’ she suggested.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Actuated by that spirit of perversity which makes us do what
    we do not want to do, what we know will make us suffer as much
    as it is possible in the given circumstance to suffer, I shook my
    head. ‘No,’ I said. ‘I must get back.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>I had never longed for anything more passionately than I longed
    to accept Barbara’s invitation.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>She repeated it. ‘Do come in,’ she said. ‘It won’t take a
    minute to make tea on the gas ring.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Again I shook my head, in too much anguish, this time, to be
    able to speak. My trembling voice, I was afraid, would have
    betrayed me. Instinctively I knew that if I went into the house
    with her we should become lovers. My old determination to
    resist what had seemed the baser desires strengthened my resolution
    not to go in.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Well, if you won’t,’ she shrugged her shoulders, ‘then good-night.’
    Her voice had a note of annoyance in it.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>I shook her hand and walked dumbly away. When I had gone
    ten yards my resolution abjectly broke down. I turned. Barbara
    was still standing on the doorstep, trying to fit the latchkey into
    the lock.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Barbara,’ I called in a voice that sounded horribly unnatural
    in my own ears. I hurried back. She turned to look at me. ‘Do
    you mind if I change my mind and accept your invitation after all?
    I find I really am rather thirsty.’ What a humiliation, I thought.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>She laughed. ‘What a goose you are, Francis.’ And she added
    in a bantering tone: ‘If you weren’t such a silly old dear I’d tell
    you to go to the nearest horse-trough and drink there.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I’m sorry,’ I said. Standing once more close to her, breathing
    once again her rosy perfume, I felt as I had felt when, a child, I
    had run down from my terrifying night nursery to find my mother
    sitting in the dining-room—reassured, relieved of a hideous burden,
    incredibly happy, but at the same time profoundly miserable in
    the consciousness that what I was doing was against all the rules,
    was a sin, the enormity of which I could judge from the very
    mournful tenderness of my mother’s eyes and the severe, portentous
    silence out of which, as though from a thundercloud, my
    huge and bearded father looked at me like an outraged god. I
    was happy, being with Barbara; I was utterly miserable because
    I was not with her, so to speak, in the right way: I was not I;
    she, for all that the features were the same, was no longer herself.
    I was happy at the thought that I should soon be kissing her;
    miserable because that was not how I wanted to love my imaginary
    Barbara; miserable too, when I secretly admitted to myself the
    existence of the real Barbara, because I felt it an indignity to
    be the slave of such a mistress.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Of course, if you want me to go,’ I said, reacting feebly again
    towards revolt, ‘I’ll go.’ And desperately trying to be facetious,
    ‘I’m not sure that it wouldn’t be best if I drowned myself in
    that horse-trough,’ I added.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘As you like,’ she said lightly. The door was open now; she
    walked into the darkness. I followed her, closing the door behind
    me carefully. We groped our way up steep dark stairs. She
    unlocked another door, turned a switch. The sudden light
    was dazzling.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘All’s well that ends well,’ she said, smiling at me, and she
    slipped the cloak from off her bare shoulders.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>On the contrary, I thought, it was the tragedy of errors. I
    stepped towards her, I stretched out my hands and gripped her by
    her two thin arms a little below the shoulder. I bent down and
    kissed her averted cheek; she turned her face towards me, and it
    was her mouth.</p>

    <div class='poetry-container' style=''><div class='lgp'> <!-- rend=';' -->
    <p class='line0'>There is no future, there is no more past;</p>
    <p class='line0'>No roots nor fruits, but momentary flowers.</p>
    <p class='line0'>Lie still, only lie still and night will last</p>
    <p class='line0'>Silent and dark, not for a space of hours,</p>
    <p class='line0'>But everlastingly. Let me forget</p>
    <p class='line0'>All but your perfume, every night but this,</p>
    <p class='line0'>The shame, the fruitless weeping, the regret.</p>
    <p class='line0'>Only lie still: this faint and quiet bliss</p>
    <p class='line0'>Shall flower upon the brink of sleep and spread</p>
    <p class='line0'>Till there is nothing else but you and I</p>
    <p class='line0'>Clasped in a timeless silence. But like one</p>
    <p class='line0'>Who, doomed to die, at morning will be dead,</p>
    <p class='line0'>I know, though night seem dateless, that the sky</p>
    <p class='line0'>Must brighten soon before to-morrow’s sun.</p>
    </div></div> <!-- end poetry block --><!-- end rend -->

    <p class='pindent'>It was then that I learned to live only in the moment—to ignore
    causes, motives, antecedents, to refuse responsibility for what
    should follow. It was then that I learned, since the future was
    always bound to be a painful repetition of what had happened
    before, never to look forward for comfort or justification, but to
    live now and here in the heart of human reality, in the very centre
    of the hot dark hive. But there is a spontaneous thoughtlessness
    which no thoughtful pains can imitate. Being what I am, I shall
    never rival with those little boys who throw their baby sisters
    over the cliff for the sake of seeing the delightful splash; never
    put a pistol to my head and for the mere fun of the thing pull the
    trigger; never, looking down from the gallery at Covent Garden
    at the thronged Wagnerites or Saint-Saënsians in the stalls below,
    lightly toss down that little hand-grenade (however piercingly
    amusing the jest might be), which I still preserve, charged with
    its pound of high explosive, in my hat-box, ready for all emergencies.
    Such gorgeous carelessness of all but the immediate sensation I
    can only remotely imitate. But I do my best, and I did it always
    conscientiously with Barbara. Still, the nights always did come
    to an end. And even during them, lapped in the temperament,
    I could never, even for an instant, be quite unaware of who she
    was, who I was and had been and would be to-morrow. The
    recollection of these things deprived every rapture of its passionate
    integrity and beneath the surface of every calm and silent trance
    spread out a profound uneasiness. Kissing her I wished that I
    were not kissing her, holding her in my arms I wished that it were
    somebody else I was holding. And sometimes in the dark quiet
    silences I thought that it would be better if I were dead.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Did she love me? At any rate she often said so, even in writing.
    I have all her letters still—a score of scribbled notes sent up by
    messenger from one wing of the Hotel Cecil to the other and a few
    longer letters written when she was on her holiday or week-ending
    somewhere apart from me. Here, I spread out the sheets. It
    is a competent, well-educated writing; the pen rarely leaves the
    paper, running on from letter to letter, from word to word. A
    rapid writing, flowing, clear and legible. Only here and there,
    generally towards the ends of her brief notes, is the clarity troubled;
    there are scrawled words made up of formless letters. I pore
    over them in an attempt to interpret their meaning. ‘I adore
    you, my beloved .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. kiss you a thousand times .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. long for it
    to be night .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. love you madly.’ These are the fragmentary
    meanings I contrive to disengage from the scribbles. We write
    such things illegibly for the same reason as we clothe our bodies.
    Modesty does not permit us to walk naked, and the expression of
    our most intimate thoughts, our most urgent desires and secret
    memories, must not—even when we have so far done violence to
    ourselves as to commit the words to paper—be too easily read and
    understood. Pepys, when he recorded the most scabrous details
    of his loves, is not content with writing in cipher; he breaks into
    bad French as well. And I remember, now that I mention Pepys,
    having done the same sort of thing in my own letters to Barbara;
    winding up with a ‘Bellissima, ti voglio un bene enorme,’ or a
    ‘Je t’embrasse un peu partout.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>But did she love me? In a kind of way I think she did. I
    gratified her vanity. Her successes so far had mostly been with
    genial young soldiers. She had counted few literary men among
    her slaves. And being infected with the queer snobbery of those
    who regard an artist, or any one calling himself by that name, as
    somehow superior to other beings—she was more impressed by a
    Café Royal loafer than by an efficient officer, and considered that
    it was a more arduous and finer thing to be able to paint, or even
    appreciate, a cubist picture or play a piece by Bartok on the piano
    than to run a business or plead in a court of law—being therefore
    deeply convinced of my mysterious importance and significance—she
    was flattered to have me abjectly gambolling around her.
    There is a German engraving of the sixteenth century, made at
    the time of the reaction against scholasticism, which represents
    a naked Teutonic beauty riding on the back of a bald and bearded
    man, whom she directs with a bridle and urges on with a switch.
    The old man is labelled Aristotle. After two thousand years
    of slavery to the infallible sage it was a good revenge. To Barbara,
    no doubt, I appeared as a kind of minor Aristotle. But what
    made the comparison somewhat less flattering to me was the fact
    that she was equally gratified by the attentions of another literary
    man, the swarthy Syrian with the blue jowl and the silver monocle.
    Even more gratified, I think; for he wrote poems which were
    frequently published in the monthly magazines (mine, alas, were not)
    and, what was more, he never lost an opportunity of telling people
    that he was a poet; he was for ever discussing the inconveniences
    and compensating advantages of possessing an artistic temperament.
    That, for a time at any rate, she preferred me to the Syrian was
    due to the fact that I was quite unattached and far more hopelessly
    in love with Barbara than he. The red-haired and, to me, inferior
    substitute for Buckle’s <span class='it'>History</span> engrossed the greater part of his
    heart at this time. Moreover, he was a calm and experienced
    lover who did not lose his head about trifles. From me Barbara
    got passion of a kind she could not have hoped for from the Syrian—a
    passion which, in spite of my reluctance, in spite of my efforts
    to resist it, reduced me to a state of abjection at her feet. It is
    pleasant to be worshipped, to command and inflict pain; Barbara
    enjoyed these things as much as any one.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>It was the Syrian who in the end displaced me. I had noticed
    in October that friends from South Africa, with whom it was
    necessary for Barbara to lunch and dine, kept arriving in ever
    increasing quantities. And when it wasn’t friends from South
    Africa it was Aunt Phoebe, who had become suddenly importunate.
    Or old Mr. Goble, the one who had known her grandfather so well.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>When I asked her to describe these festivities, she either said:
    ‘Oh, it was dreadfully dull. We talked about the family,’
    or merely smiled, shrugged her shoulders and retired into her
    impregnable silence.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Why do you lie to me?’ I asked.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>She preserved her silence and her secret smile.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>There were evenings when I insisted that she should throw over
    the friends from South Africa and dine with me. Reluctantly
    she would consent; but she took her revenge on these occasions
    by talking about all the jolly men she had known.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>One evening, when, in spite of all my entreaties, my threats
    and commands, she had gone to dine with Aunt Phoebe in Golders
    Green and stay the night, I kept watch in Regent Square. It
    was a damp, cold night. From nine o’clock till past midnight I
    remained at my post, marching up and down opposite the house
    where she lived. As I walked I ran the point of my stick with a
    rattling noise along the railings which surrounded the gardens in
    the middle of the square; that rattling accompanied my thoughts.
    From the dank black trees overhead an occasional heavy drop
    would fall. I must have walked twelve miles that evening.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>In those three hours I thought of many things. I thought of
    the suddenly leaping bonfire and the young face shining in the
    darkness. I thought of my boyish love, and then how I had seen
    that face again and the different love it had inspired in the man.
    I thought of kisses, caresses, whispers in the darkness. I thought
    of the Syrian with his black eyebrows and his silver monocle, his
    buttery dark skin damply shining through the face-powder, and
    the powder snowy white among the black stubbles of his jowl.
    She was probably with him at this moment. Monna Vanna,
    Monna Bice—‘Love’s not so pure and abstract as they use to say,
    who have no mistress but their Muse.’ Reality gives imagination
    the lie direct. Barbara is the truth, I thought, and that she likes
    the man with the silver monocle is the truth, and that I have slept
    with her is the truth, and that he has too is quite probably the truth.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>And it is the truth that men are cruel and stupid and that they
    suffer themselves to be driven even to destruction by shepherds
    as stupid as themselves. I thought of my passion for universal
    justice, of my desire that all men should be free, leisured, educated,
    of my imaginations of a future earth peopled by human beings
    who should live according to reason. But of what use is leisure,
    when leisure is occupied with listening-in and going to football
    matches? freedom, when men voluntarily enslave themselves to
    politicians like those who now rule the world? education, when
    the literate read the evening papers and the fiction magazines?
    And the future, the radiant future—supposing that it should differ
    from the past in anything but the spread of material comfort and
    spiritual uniformity, suppose it conceivably were to be in some
    way superior, what has that to do with me? Nothing whatever.
    Nothing, nothing, nothing.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>I was interrupted in my meditations by a policeman who came
    up to me, politely touched his helmet and asked me what I was
    doing. ‘I seen you walking up and down here for the last hour,’
    he said. I gave him half a crown and told him I was waiting for
    a lady. The policeman laughed discreetly. I laughed too.
    Indeed, the joke was a marvellously good one. When he was gone,
    I went on with my walking.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>And this war, I thought. Was there the slightest prospect
    that any good would come of it? The war to end war! The
    argument was forcible enough this time; it was backed up with a
    kick in the breech, the most terrific kick ever administered. But
    would it convince humanity more effectively than any other argument
    had ever done?</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Still, men are courageous, I thought, are patient, kind, self-sacrificing.
    But they are all the contradictory things, as well—and
    both, good and bad, because they can’t help it. Forgive them,
    for they know not what they do. Everything arises from a great
    primeval animal stupidity. That is the deepest of all realities—stupidity,
    the being unaware.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>And the aware, the not stupid—they are the odd exceptions,
    they are irrelevant to the great reality, they are lies like the ideal of
    love, like dreams of the future, like belief in justice. To live
    among their works is to live in a world of bright falsehoods, apart
    from the real world; it is to escape. Escape is cowardly; to be
    comforted by what is untrue or what is irrelevant to the world in
    which we live is stupid.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>And my own talents, such as they are, are irrelevant. So is the
    art to whose service I devote them, a lying consolation. A Martian
    would find the writing of phrases containing words of similar
    sound at fixed recurrent intervals as queer as buying castor oil for
    the lubrification of machines of destruction. I remembered the
    lines I had written for Barbara—the cheerful comic-amorous
    lines—at the time of the last epidemic of air raids. The octo-syllables
    jingled in my head.</p>

    <div class='poetry-container' style=''><div class='lgp'> <!-- rend=';' -->
    <p class='line0'>But when the next full moon invites</p>
    <p class='line0'>New bugaboos and fly-by-nights,</p>
    <p class='line0'>Let us seek out some deep alcove,</p>
    <p class='line0'>Some immemorial haunt of love.</p>
    <p class='line0'>There we’ll retire with cakes and wine</p>
    <p class='line0'>And dare the imbecile to shine.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.</p>
    </div></div> <!-- end poetry block --><!-- end rend -->

    <p class='noindent'>I was just repeating them to myself, when a taxi turned into the
    quiet square, rolled slowly along the curb and came to a halt in
    front of the house where Barbara lived. By the dim light of a
    muffled street lamp I saw two people stepping out of it, a man and
    a woman. The masculine silhouette moved forward and, bending
    over his hand, began to count money by the light of the little
    lamp at the recording clock-face. In the narrow beam I saw the
    glitter of a monocle. Money clinked, the taxi drove away. The
    two figures mounted the steps; the door opened before them, they
    passed into the house.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>I walked away, repeating to myself every injurious and abusive
    word that can be applied to a woman. I felt, if anything, rather
    relieved. It pleased me to think that all was over, all was now
    definitely and for ever done with.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘ ’Night, sir.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>It was the friendly policeman; I thought I heard an almost
    imperceptible note of amusement in his voice.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>For the next four days I made no sign of life. Every day I
    hoped that she would write or telephone to ask what had become
    of me. She did nothing of the kind. My sense of relief had
    turned into a feeling of misery. On the fifth day, as I was going
    out to lunch, I met her in the courtyard. She made no reference
    to the unprecedented length of my silence. I said none of the
    bitter things that I had planned to say in the event of just such an
    accidental meeting as this. Instead, I asked her, I implored her
    even, to come to lunch. Barbara declined the invitation; she
    had a South African engagement.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Come to dinner, then,’ I abjectly begged. Humiliation, I
    felt, could go no further. I would give anything to be received
    back into grace.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Barbara shook her head. ‘I wish I could,’ she said. ‘But
    that tiresome old Mr. Goble .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.’</p>

    <h2>CHAPTER VI</h2>

    <p class='pindent'>Such, then, were the phantoms that my recitation called up to
    dance on the surface of the Tyrrhenian. Salutarily they reminded
    me that I was only on my holiday, that the landscape in the midst
    of which I was now floating was hardly better than an illusion and
    that life was only real and earnest during the eleven months of each
    year which I spent between Gog’s Court and Miss Carruthers’s.
    I was a democratic Englishman and a Londoner at that, living in an
    age when the <span class='it'>Daily Mail</span> sells two million copies every morning; I
    had no right to so much sunlight, so tepid and clear a sea, such spiky
    mountains, such clouds, such blue expanses of sky; I had no right
    to Shelley; and if I were a true democrat, then I ought not
    even to think. But again I must plead my congenital weakness.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Couched on the water, I was dreaming of the ideal democratic
    state where no irrelevant Holy Ghost-possessed exception should
    trouble the flat serenity of the rule—the rule of Cloudesley and
    Carruthers, Fluffy and the alert, inimitable Brimstone—when all
    at once I became aware that a sailing-boat was coming up behind
    me, was right on top of me, in fact. The white sail towered over
    me; with a little sizzling ripple at the prow, with a clop clop of
    tiny waves against its flanks, the brown varnished boat bore quickly
    down on me. It is a horrible thing to be afraid, to be shaken by
    that sudden spasm of fear which cannot be controlled because it
    comes so quickly that the controlling forces of the mind are taken
    unaware. Every cell in the body, it seems, feels terror; from a
    man one is humiliated for a moment into a congeries of shrinking
    amoebae. One descends the scale of being; one drops down the
    evolutionary gamut to become for a second no more than a startled
    and terrified beast. One moment I had been dozing on my
    translucent mattress, like a philosopher; the next I was inarticulately
    shouting, frantically moving my limbs to escape from the
    approaching and now inevitable peril.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Hi!’ I was yelling, and then something caught me a fearful
    crack on the side of the head and pushed me down into the water.
    I was conscious of swallowing a vast quantity of brine, of breathing
    water into my lungs and violently choking. Then for a time I
    knew nothing; the blow must momentarily have stunned me. I
    became more or less conscious again, to find myself just coming
    to the surface, my face half in, half out of water. I was coughing
    and gasping—coughing to get rid of the water that was in my
    lungs, gasping for air. Both processes, I now perceive, achieved
    exactly the contrary of what they were intended to achieve. For
    I coughed up all the stationary air that was in my lungs and, my
    mouth being under water, I drew in fresh gulps of brine. Meanwhile
    my blood, loaded with carbonic acid gas, kept rushing to
    my lungs in the hope of exchanging the deadly stuff for oxygen.
    In vain; there was no oxygen to exchange it for.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>I felt an extraordinary pain in the back of my neck—not excruciating,
    but dull; dull and far-reaching and profound, and at
    the same time strangely disgusting—a sickening, revolting sort
    of pain. The nerves controlling my respiratory system were giving
    up in despair; that disgusting pain in my neck was their gesture
    of farewell, their last spasm of agony. Slowly I ceased to be
    conscious; I faded gradually out of life like the Cheshire Cat in
    <span class='it'>Alice in Wonderland</span>. The last thing that was left of me, that
    continued to hang in my consciousness when everything else had
    vanished, was the pain.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>In the circumstances, I know, it would have been the classical
    thing if all my past life had unwound itself in a flash before the
    mind’s eye. Whiz—an uninteresting drama in thirty-two reels
    ought duly to have run its course and I should have remembered
    everything, from the taste of the baby food in my bottle to the
    taste of yesterday’s marsala at the Grand Hotel, from my first
    caning to my last kiss. In point of fact, however, none of the
    correct things happened. The last thoughts I remember thinking
    as I went down were about the Rabbit Fanciers’ Gazette and my
    mother. In a final access of that conscientiousness which has
    haunted and handicapped me all my life long, I reflected that I
    ought to have another leading article ready by next Friday. And
    it struck me very forcibly that my mother would be most seriously
    inconvenienced when she arrived in a few days’ time to find that
    I was no longer in a position to accompany her on her journey
    to Rome.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>When I next came to my senses I was lying face downwards on
    the beach with somebody sitting astride of my back, as though we
    were playing horses, using Professor Schaefer’s method of producing
    artificial respiration. ‘Uno, due, tre, quattro’—and at
    every ‘quattro’ the man on my back threw his weight forward on to
    his hands, which were resting, one on either side of the spine, on
    my lower ribs. The contents of my lungs were violently expelled.
    Then my rescuer straightened himself up again, the pressure was
    relaxed and my lungs replenished themselves with air. ‘Uno, due,
    tre, quattro’—the process began again.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘He’s breathing! He’s all right. He’s opening his eyes!’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Carefully, as though I were a crate of very valuable china, they
    turned me right way up. I was aware of the strong sunshine, of a
    throbbing headache centred somewhere above the left temple, of
    a crowd of people standing round. With deliberation and consciously
    I breathed the air; loud voices shouted instructions. Two
    people began to rub the soles of my feet. A third ran up with a
    child’s bucket full of sun-scorched sand and poured it on the pit of
    my stomach. This happy thought immediately had an immense
    success. All the curious and sympathetic spectators who had been
    standing round my corpse, looking on while Professor Schaefer
    was being applied to me and wishing that they could do something
    to help, now discovered that there was actually something helpful
    that they could do. They could help to restore my circulation
    by sprinkling hot sand on me. In a moment I had a dozen sympathizers
    busy around me, skimming the cream off the hot tideless
    beach in little buckets, with spades or in the palms of their scooping
    hands, to pour it over me. In a few seconds I was almost buried
    under a mound of burning grey sand. On the faces of all my good
    Samaritans I noticed an expression of child-like earnestness. They
    rushed backwards and forwards with their little buckets as though
    there were nothing more serious in life than building sand castles
    on the stomachs of drowned men. And the children themselves
    joined in. Horrified at first by the spectacle of my limp and livid
    corpse, they had clung to paternal hands, shrunk away behind protecting
    skirts, looking on while Professor Schaefer was being practised
    on me, with a reluctant and disgusted curiosity. But when
    I had come alive again, when they saw their elders burying me with
    sand and understood that it was really only a tremendously good
    game, then how violent was their reaction! Shrilly laughing,
    whooping with excitement and delight, they rushed on me with
    their little implements. It was only with difficulty that they could
    be prevented from throwing handfuls of sand in my face, from
    pouring it into my ears, from making me eat it. And one small
    boy, ambitious to do something that nobody else had done, rushed
    down to the sea, filled his bucket with water and stale foam, ran
    back and emptied its contents, with what a shout of triumph!
    plop, from a height on to my solar plexus.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>That was too much for my gravity. I began to laugh. But I
    did not get very far with my laughter. For after the first outburst
    of it, when I wanted to take breath for the next, I found
    that I had forgotten how to breathe, and it was only after a long
    choking struggle that I managed to reacquire the art. The
    children were frightened; this was no part of the delightful game.
    The grown-ups stopped being helpful and allowed themselves to be
    driven away from my corpse by the competent authorities. An
    umbrella was planted in the sand behind me. Within its rosy
    shadow I was left in peace to make secure my precarious footing
    on existence. For a long time I lay with my eyes shut. An
    immensely long way off, it seemed, somebody was still rubbing my
    feet. Periodically, somebody else pushed a spoon with brandy
    and milk in it into my mouth. I felt very tired, but wonderfully
    comfortable. And it seemed to me at that moment that there could
    be nothing more exquisitely pleasurable than merely breathing.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>After a while, I felt sufficiently strong and sufficiently safe in
    my strength to open my eyes again and look about me. How
    novel, how wonderfully charming everything seemed! The first
    thing I saw was a half-naked young giant crouching obsequiously
    at my feet, rubbing my bloodless soles and ankles. Under his
    shining copper skin there was a sliding of muscles. His face
    was like a Roman’s, his hair jet black and curly. When he noticed
    that I had opened my eyes and was looking at him he smiled, and
    his teeth were brilliantly white, his brown eyes flashed from a
    setting of shiny bluish enamel.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>A voice asked me in Italian how I was feeling. I looked round.
    A stout man with a large red, rubbery face and a black moustache
    was sitting beside me. In one hand he held a teacup, in the other
    a spoon. He was dressed in white duck. The sweat was pouring
    off his face; he looked as though he had been buttered. From
    all round his very bright black eyes little wrinkles spread out like
    rays from a gloria. He proffered the spoon. I swallowed. The
    backs of his large brown hands were covered with fine hairs.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I am the doctor,’ he explained, and smiled.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>I nodded and smiled back. It seemed to me that I had never
    seen such a lovely doctor before.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>And then, when I looked up, there was the blue sky, beautifully
    scalloped by the edge of the pink umbrella. And lowering my
    eyes I saw people standing round looking at me—all smiling.
    Between them I caught glimpses of the blue sea.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Belli sono,’ I said to the doctor, and shut my eyes again.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>And many men so beautiful.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. In the blood-red darkness
    behind my eyelids I listened to their voices. Slowly, voluptuously,
    I breathed the salty air. The young giant went on rubbing my
    feet. With an effort I lifted one of my hands and laid it on my
    chest. Lightly, like a blind man feeling for the sense of a page of
    Braille, I ran my fingers over the smooth skin. I felt the ribs and
    the little depressions between them. And all at once, under my
    finger tips, I was aware of a hardly perceptible throbbing—pulse,
    pulse, pulse—it was that I had been searching for. The blind
    fingers creeping across the page had spelled out a strange word.
    I did not try to interpret it. It was enough to be glad that the
    word was there. For a long time I lay quite still, feeling my
    beating heart.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Si sente meglio?’ asked the doctor.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>I opened my eyes. ‘Mi sento felice.’ He smiled at me. The
    rays round the twin bright glories of his eyes emphasized themselves.
    It was as though the holy symbol had somehow suddenly
    become more holy.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘It is good not to be dead,’ he said.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘It is very good.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>And I looked once more at the sky and the pink umbrella overhead.
    I looked at the young giant, so strong and yet so docile at
    my feet. I turned my eyes to right and left. The circle of
    curious spectators had dissolved. Out of danger, I had ceased to
    be an object of sympathy or curiosity. The holiday-makers were
    going about their business as usual. I watched them, happily.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>A young couple in bathing dresses walked slowly past me towards
    the sea. Their faces, their necks and shoulders, their bare arms
    and legs were burned to a soft transparent brown. They walked
    slowly, holding hands, walked with such a grace, such an easy
    majesty that I felt like weeping. They were very young, they
    were tall, slender and strong. They were beautiful as a couple
    of young thoroughbred horses; gracefully, idly, majestically they
    seemed to be walking in a world that was beyond good and
    evil. It did not matter what they might do or say; they were
    justified by the mere fact that they existed. They paused, looked
    at me for a moment, one with brown eyes, one with grey, flashed
    at me with their white teeth, asked how I was, and when I told
    them that I was better, smiled again and passed on.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>A little girl dressed in a primrose-coloured garment that was
    paler in tone than her dark face and limbs came running up,
    halted two or three yards away and began to look at me earnestly.
    Her eyes were very large and fringed by absurdly long black lashes.
    Above them there expanded an immense domed forehead that
    would have done credit to a philosopher. Her snub nose was so
    small that you hardly noticed it was there at all. Black and frizzy,
    her hair stood out, in a state of permanent explosion, round her
    head. For a long time she stared at me. I stared back.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘What do you want?’ I asked at last.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>And suddenly, at the sound of my voice, the child was overwhelmed
    by shyness. She covered her face with her forearm as
    though she were warding off a blow. Then, after a second or
    two, she peeped out at me cautiously from under her elbow. Her
    face had become quite red. I called again. It was once too
    often. She turned and ran away, ran back to her family, who were
    sitting, twenty yards down the beach, in the precarious and shifting
    oasis of shadow cast by a large striped umbrella. I saw her hurl
    herself into the arms of a large placid mother in white muslin.
    Then, having successfully abolished my existence by burying her
    face in the comfortable bosom, she slid down again from her mother’s
    knee and went on playing with her little sister, serenely, as though
    the untoward incident had never occurred.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Mournfully, from somewhere in the distance, came the long,
    suspended cry of the vendor of doughnuts. ‘Bomboloni.’ Two
    young American marchesas in purple bathing gowns went past, talking
    together on one note, in indefatigable even voices. ‘.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. and
    he has such a lovely mentality,’ I heard one of them saying.
    ‘But what I like,’ said the other, who seemed to have acquired
    more completely the Latin habit of mind, ‘what I like is his teeth.’
    A middle-aged man, with the large stomach that comes of too much
    <span class='it'>pasta</span>, and a very thin little boy of twelve now entered my field
    of vision, all wet and shiny from the sea. The hot sand burned
    their feet and they went hopping across the scorching beach with
    an agility which it was good to see. But the soles of mad Concetta’s
    feet were made of hornier stuff. Barefooted, she walked
    down every morning from the mountains, carrying her basket
    of fruit over one arm and holding in the other hand a long staff.
    She hawked her wares along the beach, she went the round of the
    villas until her basket was empty. Then she walked back again,
    across the plain and up into the hills. Turning from the fat man
    and the little thin boy I saw her standing before me. She was
    dressed in a stained and tattered old dress. Her grey hair escaped
    in wisps from under a wide straw hat. Her old face was eager,
    thin and sharp; the wrinkled skin was like brown parchment
    stretched over the bones. Leaning on her staff, she looked at me
    for a little in silence.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘So you’re the drowned foreigner,’ she said at last.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘If he were drowned, how could he be alive?’ asked the doctor.
    The young giant found this exquisitely witty; he laughed profoundly,
    out of the depths of his huge chest. ‘Go away now,
    Concetta,’ the doctor went on. ‘He must be kept quiet. We
    can’t have you treating him to one of your discourses.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Concetta paid no attention to him. She was used to this sort
    of thing.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘The mercy of God,’ she began, shaking her head, ‘where
    should we be without it? You are young, signorino. You still
    have time to do much. God has preserved you. I am old. But
    I lean on the cross.’ And straightening herself up, she lifted her
    staff. A cross-piece of wood had been nailed near the top of it.
    Affectionately she kissed it. ‘I love the cross,’ she said. ‘The
    cross is beautiful, the cross is .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.’ But she was interrupted by
    a young nurserymaid who came running up to ask for half a kilo
    of the best grapes. Theology could not be allowed to interfere
    with business. Concetta took out her little steelyard, put a bunch
    of grapes in the pan and moved the weight back and forth along
    the bar in search of equilibrium. The nurserymaid stood by.
    She had a round face, red cheeks, dimples, black hair and eyes
    like black buttons. She was as plump as a fruit. The young
    giant looked up at her in frank admiration. She rolled the buttons
    towards him—for an instant, then utterly ignored him, and humming
    nonchalantly to herself as though she were alone on a desert island
    and wanted to keep her spirits up, she gazed pensively away at the
    picturesque beauties of nature.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Six hundred grammes,’ said Concetta.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>The nurserymaid paid for them, and still humming, still on
    her desert island, she walked off, taking very small steps, undulating
    rotundly, like a moon among wind-driven clouds. The young
    giant stopped rubbing my feet and stared after her. With the
    moon’s beauty and the moon’s soft pace the nurserymaid tottered
    along, undulating unsteadily on her high heels across the sand.</p>

    <p class='pindent'><span class='it'>Rabear</span>, I thought: old Skeat was perfectly right to translate
    the word as he did.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Bella grassa,’ said the doctor, voicing what were obviously
    the young giant’s sentiments. Mine too; for after all, she was
    alive, obeyed the laws of her nature, walked in the sun, ate grapes
    and <span class='it'>rabear’d</span>. I shut my eyes again. Pulse, pulse, pulse; the
    heart beat steadily under my fingers. I felt like Adam, newly
    created and weak like a butterfly fresh from its chrysalis—the
    red clay still too wet and limp to allow of my standing upright.
    But soon, when it had dried to firmness, I should arise and scamper
    joyously about this span new world, and be myself a young giant, a
    graceful and majestic thoroughbred, a child, a wondering Bedlamite.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>There are some people who contrive to pass their lives in a
    state of permanent convalescence. They behave at every moment
    as though they had been miraculously preserved from death the
    moment before; they live exhilaratedly for the mere sake of living
    and can be intoxicated with happiness just because they happen
    not to be dead. For those not born convalescent it may be that
    the secret of happiness consists in being half-drowned regularly
    three times a day before meals. I recommend it as a more drastic
    alternative to my ‘water-shoot-in-every-office’ remedy for ennui.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘You’re alone here?’ asked the doctor.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>I nodded.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘No relations?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Not at present.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘No friends of any kind?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>I shook my head.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘H’m,’ he said.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>He had a wart growing on one side of his nose where it joined
    the cheek. I found myself studying it intently; it was a most
    interesting wart, whitish, but a little flushed on its upper surface. It
    looked like a small unripe cherry. ‘Do you like cherries?’ I asked.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>The doctor seemed rather surprised. ‘Yes,’ he said, after a
    moment’s silence and with great deliberation, as though he had been
    carefully weighing the matter in his mind.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘So do I.’ And I burst out laughing. This time, however,
    my breathing triumphantly stood the strain. ‘So do I. But not
    unripe ones,’ I added, gasping with mirth. It seemed to me that
    nothing funnier had ever been said.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>And then Mrs. Aldwinkle stepped definitely into my life. For,
    looking round, still heaving with the after-swell of my storm of
    laughter, I suddenly saw the Chinese lantern lady of the <span class='it'>patino</span>
    standing before me. Her flame-coloured costume, a little less
    radiant now that it was wet, still shone among the aquarium
    shadows of her green parasol, and her face looked as though it were
    she who had been drowned, not I.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘They tell me that you’re an Englishman,’ she said in the
    same ill-controlled, unmusical voice I had heard, not long since,
    misquoting Shelley.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Still tipsy, still light-headed with convalescence, I laughingly
    admitted it.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I hear you were nearly drowned.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Quite right,’ I said, still laughing; it was such a marvellous
    joke.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I’m most sorry to hear .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.’ She had a way of leaving her
    sentences unfinished. The words would tail off into a dim inarticulate
    blur of sound.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Don’t mention it,’ I begged her. ‘It isn’t at all disagreeable,
    you know. Afterwards, at any rate .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.’ I stared at her affectionately
    and with my convalescent’s boundless curiosity. She
    stared back at me. Her eyes, I thought, must have the same bulge
    as those little red lenses one screws to the rear forks of bicycles;
    they collected all the light diffused around them and reflected it
    again with a concentrated glitter.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I came to ask whether I could be of any assistance,’ said the
    Chinese lantern lady.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Most kind.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘You’re alone here?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Quite, for the present.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Then perhaps you might care to come and stay a night or two
    at my house, until you’re entirely .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.’ She mumbled, made a
    gesture that implied the missing word and went on. ‘I have a
    house over there.’ She waved her hand in the direction of the
    mountainous section of the Shelleian landscape.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Gleefully, in my tipsy mood, I accepted her invitation. ‘Too
    delightful,’ I said. Everything, this morning, was too delightful.
    I should have accepted with genuine, unmixed pleasure an invitation
    to stay with Miss Carruthers or Mr. Brimstone.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘And your name?’ she asked. ‘I don’t know that yet.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Chelifer.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Chelifer? Not Francis Chelifer?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Francis Chelifer,’ I affirmed.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Francis Chelifer!’ Positively, her soul was in my name.
    ‘But how <span class='it'>won</span>derful! I’ve wanted to meet you for years.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>For the first time since I had risen intoxicated from the dead
    I had an awful premonition of to-morrow’s sobriety. I remembered
    for the first time that round the corner, only just round the corner,
    lay the real world.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘And what’s your name?’ I asked apprehensively.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Lilian Aldwinkle,’ said the Chinese lantern lady; and she
    shaped her lips into a smile that was positively piercing in its
    sweetness. The blue lamps that were her eyes glittered with such
    a focussed intensity that even the colour-blind chauffeurs who see
    green omnibuses rolling down Piccadilly and in the Green Park
    blood-coloured grass and vermilion trees would have known them
    for the danger signals they were.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>An hour later I was reclining on cushions in Mrs. Aldwinkle’s
    Rolls-Royce. There was no escape.</p>

    <h2>CHAPTER VII</h2>

    <p class='pindent'>No escape.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. But I was still tipsy enough not seriously to
    desire escape. My premonition of sobriety had been no more
    than a momentary flash. It came and it passed again, almost
    immediately, as I became once more absorbed in what seemed to
    me the endless and lovely comedy that was being acted all around
    me. It was enough for me that I existed and that things were
    happening to me. I was carried by two or three young giants to
    the hotel, I was dressed, my clothes were packed for me. In the
    entrance hall, while I was waiting for Mrs. Aldwinkle to come
    and fetch me, I made some essays at walking; the feebleness of
    my legs was a source to me of delighted laughter.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Dressed in pale yellow tussore with a large straw hat on her
    head, Mrs. Aldwinkle finally appeared. Her guests, she explained,
    had gone home in another machine; I should be able to lie flat,
    or very nearly, in her empty car. And in case I felt bad—she
    shook a silver brandy flask at me. Escape? I did not so much
    as think of it, I was enchanted.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Luxuriously I reclined among the cushions. Mrs. Aldwinkle
    tapped the forward-looking window. The chauffeur languidly
    moved his hand and the machine rolled forward, nosing its way
    through the crowd of admiring car-fanciers which, in Italy, collects
    as though by magic round every stationary automobile. And
    Mrs. Aldwinkle’s was a particularly attractive specimen. Young
    men called to their friends: ‘<span class='it'>Venite. È una Ro-Ro.</span>’ And in
    awed voices little boys whispered to one another: ‘<span class='it'>Una Ro-Ro.</span>’
    The crowd reluctantly dispersed before our advance; we glided
    away from before the Grand Hotel, turned into the main street,
    crossed the piazza, in the centre of which, stranded high and dry
    by the receding sea, stood the little pink fort which had been built
    by the Princes of Massa Carrara to keep watch on a Mediterranean
    made dangerous by Barbary pirates, and rolled out of
    the village by the road leading across the plain towards the
    mountains.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Shuffling along in a slowly moving cloud of dust, a train of
    white oxen advanced, shambling and zig-zagging along the road to
    meet us. Eight yoke of them there were, a long procession, with
    half a dozen drivers shouting and tugging at the leading ropes and
    cracking their whips. They were dragging a low truck, clamped
    to which was a huge monolith of flawless white marble. Uneasily,
    as we crawled past them, the animals shook their heads, turning
    this way and that, as though desperately seeking some way of escape.
    Their long curving horns clashed together; their soft white
    dewlaps shook; and into their blank brown eyes there came a look
    of fear, an entreaty that we should take pity on their invincible
    stupidity and remember that they simply could not, however hard
    they tried, get used to motor cars.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Mrs. Aldwinkle pointed at the monolith. ‘Imagine what
    Michelangelo could have made out of that,’ she said. Then,
    noticing that her pointing hand still grasped the silver flask, she
    became very solicitous. ‘You’re sure you wouldn’t like a sip of
    this?’ she asked, leaning forward. The twin blue danger signals
    glittered in my face. Her garments exhaled a scent in which there
    was ambergris. Her breath smelt of heliotrope cachous. But
    even now I did not take fright; I made no effort to escape. Guided
    by their invincible stupidity, the white oxen had behaved more
    sensibly than I.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>We rolled on. The hills came nearer. The far-away peaks
    of bare limestone were hidden by the glowing mass of the tilled
    and wooded foot-hills. Happily I looked at those huge hilly forms.
    ‘How beautiful!’ I said. Mrs. Aldwinkle seemed to take my
    words as a personal compliment.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I’m so glad you think so. So awfully .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.’ she replied in the
    tone of an author to whom you have just said that you enjoyed his
    last book so much.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>We drew nearer; the hills towered up, they opposed themselves
    like a huge wall. But the barrier parted before us; we
    passed through the gates of a valley that wound up into the mountain.
    Our road now ran parallel with the bed of a torrent. In
    the flanks of the hill to our right a marble quarry made a huge
    bare scar, hundreds of feet long. The crest of the hill was fringed
    with a growth of umbrella pines. The straight slender tree trunks
    jetted up thirty feet without a branch; their wide-spreading
    flattened domes of foliage formed a thin continuous silhouette,
    between which and the dark mass of the hill one could see a band
    of sky, thinly barred by the bare stems. It was as though, to
    emphasize the outlines of his hills, an artist had drawn a fine and
    supple brush stroke parallel with the edge of the silhouette and
    a little apart from it.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>We rolled on. The high road narrowed into the squalid street
    of a little town. The car crept along, hooting as it went.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Vezza,’ Mrs. Aldwinkle explained. ‘Michelangelo used to
    come here for his marbles.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Indeed?’ I was charmed to hear it.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Over the windows of a large shop filled with white crosses,
    broken columns and statues, I read the legend: ‘Anglo-American
    Tombstone Company.’ We emerged from the narrow street
    on to an embankment running along the edge of a river. From
    the opposite bank the ground rose steeply.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘There,’ said Mrs. Aldwinkle on a note of triumph as we crossed
    the bridge, ‘that’s my house.’ She pointed up. From the
    hill-top a long façade stared down through twenty windows; a
    tall tower pricked the sky. ‘The palace was built in 1630,’ she
    began. I even enjoyed the history lesson.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>We had crossed the bridge, we were climbing by a steep and
    winding road through what was almost a forest of olive trees. The
    abrupt grassy slope had been built up into innumerable little
    terraces on which the trees were planted. Here and there, in
    the grey luminous shadow beneath the trees, little flocks of sheep
    were grazing. The barefooted children who attended them
    came running to the side of the road to watch us passing.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I like to think of these old princely courts,’ Mrs. Aldwinkle
    was saying. ‘Like abbeys of .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. abbeys of .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.’ She
    shook her brandy flask impatiently. ‘You know .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. in
    Thingumy.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Abbeys of Thelema,’ I suggested.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘That’s it,’ said Mrs. Aldwinkle. ‘Sort of retiring-places
    where people were free to live intelligently. That’s what I want
    to make this house. I’m so delighted to have met you like this.
    You’re exactly the sort of person I want.’ She leaned forward,
    smiling and glittering. But even at the prospect of entering the
    Abbey of Thelema I did not blench.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>At this moment the car passed through a huge gateway. I
    caught a glimpse of a great flight of steps, set between cypresses,
    mounting up past a series of terraced landings to a carved doorway
    in the centre of the long façade. The road turned, the car swung
    round and the vista was closed. By an ilex avenue that wound
    round the flank of the hill we climbed more gradually towards the
    house, which we approached from the side. The road landed us
    finally in a large square court opposite a shorter reproduction of
    the great façade. At the head of a double flight of steps, curving
    horse-shoe fashion from the landing at its threshold, a tall pompous
    doorway surmounted by a coat of arms cavernously invited. The
    car drew up.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>And about time too, as I notice on re-reading what I have
    written. Few things are more profoundly boring and unprofitable
    than literary descriptions. For the writer, it is true, there is
    a certain amusement to be derived from the hunt for apt expressive
    words. Carried away by the excitement of the chase he dashes
    on, regardless of the poor readers who follow toilsomely through
    his stiff and clayey pages like the runners at the tail of a hunt,
    seeing nothing of the fun. All writers are also readers—though
    perhaps I should make exceptions in favour of a few of my colleagues
    who make a speciality of native wood-notes—and must
    therefore know how dreary description is. But that does not
    prevent them from inflicting upon others all that they themselves
    have suffered. Indeed I sometimes think that some authors must
    write as they do purely out of a desire for revenge.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Mrs. Aldwinkle’s other guests had arrived and were waiting
    for us. I was introduced and found them all equally charming.
    The little niece rushed to Mrs. Aldwinkle’s assistance; the young
    man who had rowed the <span class='it'>patino</span> rushed in his turn to the little
    niece’s and insisted on carrying all the things of which she had
    relieved her aunt. The old man with the red face, who had talked
    about the clouds, looked on benevolently at this little scene. But
    another elderly gentleman with a white beard, whom I had not
    seen before, seemed to view it with a certain disapproval. The
    young lady who had talked about the whiteness of her legs and
    who turned out to be my distinguished colleague, Miss Mary
    Thriplow, was now dressed in a little green frock with a white
    turned-down collar, white cuffs and buttons, which made her
    look like a schoolgirl in a comic opera by Offenbach. The brown
    young man stood near her.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>I got out of the car, refused all proffered assistance and contrived,
    a little wamblingly, it is true, to mount the steps.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘You must be very careful for a little,’ said Mrs. Aldwinkle
    with a maternal solicitude. ‘These,’ she added, waving her hand
    in the direction of a vista of empty saloons, the entrance to which
    we were just then passing, ‘these are the apartments of the
    Princesses.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>We walked right through the house into a great quadrangle
    surrounded on three sides by buildings and on the fourth, towards
    the rising hill, by an arcade. On a pedestal in the centre of the
    court stood a more than life-sized marble statue, representing, my
    hostess informed me, the penultimate Prince of Massa Carrara,
    wearing a very curly full-bottomed wig, Roman kilts, buskins, and
    one of those handsome classical breastplates which have the head
    of a Gorgon embossed in the middle of the chest and a little dimple
    to indicate the position of the navel in the middle of the round and
    polished belly. With the expression of one who is about to
    reveal a delightful secret and who can hardly wait until the moment
    of revelation comes to give vent to his pleasure, Mrs. Aldwinkle,
    smiling as it were below the surface of her face, led me to the
    foot of the statue. ‘Look!’ she said. It was one of those pretty
    peep-shows on which, for the sake of five minutes’ amusement
    and titillation of the eye, Grand Monarchs used to spend the value
    of a rich province. From the central arch of the arcade a flight
    of marble steps climbed up to where, set against a semi-circle of
    cypresses, at the crest of the hill, a little round temple played
    gracefully at paganism, just as the buskined and corseleted statue
    in the court below played heroically at Plutarch.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘And now look here!’ said Mrs. Aldwinkle; and taking me
    round to the other side of the statue, she led me towards a great
    door in the centre of the long range of buildings opposite the
    arcade. It was open; a vaulted corridor, like a tunnel, led clean
    through the house. Through it I could see the blue sky and the
    remote horizon of the sea. We walked along it; from the further
    threshold I found myself looking down the flight of steps which
    I had seen from below, at the entrance gate. It was a stage scene,
    but made of solid marble and with growing trees.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘What do you think of that?’ asked Mrs. Aldwinkle.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Magnificent,’ I answered, with an enthusiasm that was beginning
    to be tempered by a growing physical weariness.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Such a view,’ said Mrs. Aldwinkle, poking at it with the tip
    of her sunshade. ‘The contrast between the cypresses and the
    olive trees .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘But the view’s still lovelier from the temple,’ said the little
    niece, who was evidently very anxious to make me realize the full
    pricelessness of her Aunt Lilian’s possessions.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Mrs. Aldwinkle turned on her. ‘How utterly thoughtless you
    are!’ she said severely. ‘Do try to remember that poor Mr.
    Chelifer is still suffering from the effects of his accident. And
    you expect him to go climbing up to the temple!’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>The little niece blushed and drooped beneath the reproach.
    We sat down.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘How are you feeling now?’ asked Mrs. Aldwinkle, remembering
    once more to be solicitous.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. ‘Too appalling to think,’
    she added, ‘how nearly .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. And I’ve always so enormously
    admired your work.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘So have I,’ declared my colleague in the green frock. ‘Most
    awfully. Still, I confess, I find some of your things a little, how
    shall I say, a little alembicated. I like my poetry to be rather
    straightforwarder.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘A very sophisticated desire,’ said the red-faced gentleman.
    ‘Really simple, primitive people like their poetry to be as complicated,
    conventional, artificial and remote from the language of
    everyday affairs as possible. We reproach the eighteenth century
    with its artificiality. But the fact is that <span class='it'>Beowulf</span> is couched
    in a diction fifty times more complicated and unnatural than that
    of the <span class='it'>Essay on Man</span>. And when you compare the Icelandic
    Sagas with Dr. Johnson, you find that it’s the Doctor who lisps
    and prattles. Only the most complicated people, living in the
    midst of the most artificial surroundings, desire their poetry to
    be simple and straightforward.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>I shut my eyes and allowed the waves of conversation to roll
    over me. And what a classy conversation! Prince Papadiamantopoulos
    could hardly have kept the ball rolling on a higher
    level. Fatigue was sobering me.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Fatigue, the body’s weariness—some industrious little scientific
    emmet ought to catalogue and measure all its various effects. All—for
    it isn’t enough to show that when wage-slaves have worked
    too long they tend to fall into the machines and get pulped. The
    fact is interesting, no doubt; but there are other facts of no less
    significance. There is the fact, for example, that slight fatigue
    increases our capacity for sentiment. Those compromising love
    letters are always written in the small hours; it is at night, not
    when we are fresh and reposed, that we talk about ideal love and
    indulge our griefs. Under the influence of slight fatigue we feel
    more ready than at other times to discuss the problems of the
    universe, to make confidences, to dogmatize about the nature of
    God and to draw up plans for the future. We are also inclined to
    be more languidly voluptuous. When, however, the fatigue is
    increased beyond a certain point, we cease entirely to be sentimental,
    voluptuous, metaphysical or confiding. We cease to be aware of
    anything but the decrepitude of our being. We take no further
    interest in other people or the outside world—no further interest
    unless they will not leave us in peace, when we come to hate them
    with a deep but ineffectual loathing, mingled with disgust.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>With me, fatigue had almost suddenly passed the critical point.
    My convalescent’s delight in the world evaporated. My fellow
    beings no longer seemed to me beautiful, strange and amiable.
    Mrs. Aldwinkle’s attempts to bring me into the conversation
    exasperated me; when I looked at her, I thought her a monster.
    I realized, too late (which made the realization the more vexatious),
    what I had let myself in for when I accepted Mrs. Aldwinkle’s
    invitation. Fantastic surroundings, art, classy chats about the
    cosmos, the intelligentsia, love.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. It was too much, even on
    a holiday.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>I shut my eyes. Sometimes, when Mrs. Aldwinkle interpellated
    me, I said yes or no, without much regard to the sense of her
    remark. Discussion raged around me. From the alembication
    of my poetry they had gone on to art in general. Crikey, I said
    to myself, crikey.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. I did my best to close the ears of my mind;
    and for some little time I did, indeed, contrive to understand
    nothing of what was said. I thought of Miss Carruthers, of
    Fluffy and Mr. Brimstone, of Gog’s Court and Mr. Bosk.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Mrs. Aldwinkle’s voice, raised by irritation to a peculiar loudness,
    made itself audible to my muffled mind. ‘How often have
    I told you, Cardan,’ it said, ‘that you understand nothing of
    modern art?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘At least a thousand times,’ Mr. Cardan replied cheerfully.
    ‘But bless your heart,’ he added (and I opened my eyes in time to
    see his benevolent smile), ‘I never mind at all.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>The smile was evidently too much for Mrs. Aldwinkle’s patience.
    With the gesture of a queen who implies that the audience is at an
    end she rose from her seat. ‘Just time,’ she said, looking at her
    watch, ‘there’s just time. I really must give Mr. Chelifer some
    idea of the inside of the palace before lunch. You’d like to come?’
    She smiled at me like a siren.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Too polite to remind her of her recent outburst against the
    little niece, I declared myself delighted by the idea. Wamblingly
    I followed her into the house. Behind me I heard the young rower
    exclaiming on a note of mingled astonishment and indignation:
    ‘But a moment ago she was saying that Mr. Chelifer was too ill
    to .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Ah, but that was different,’ said the voice of the red-faced man.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Why was it different?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Because, my young friend, the other fellow is in all cases the
    rule; but <span class='it'>I</span> am invariably the exception. Shall we follow?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Mrs. Aldwinkle made me look at painted ceilings till I almost
    fell down from giddiness. She dragged me through room after
    baroque room; then drove me up dark stairs into the Middle Ages.
    By the time we were back in the <span class='it'>trecento</span> I was so much exhausted
    that I could hardly stand. My knees trembled, I felt sick.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘This is the old armoury,’ said Mrs. Aldwinkle with mounting
    enthusiasm. ‘And there are the stairs leading up to the tower.’
    She pointed to a low archway, through which, in a dusty twilight,
    the bottom of a steep stair could be seen corkscrewing up to
    unknown heights. ‘There are two hundred and thirty-two steps,’
    she added.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>At this moment the gong for luncheon rumbled remotely from
    the other end of the huge empty house.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Thank God!’ said the red-faced man devoutly.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>But our hostess, it was evident, had no feeling for punctuality.
    ‘What a bore!’ she exclaimed. ‘But never mind. We can make
    time. I wanted just to run up the tower before lunch. There’s
    such a wonderful bird’s-eye .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.’ She looked inquiringly round.
    ‘What do you think, all of you? Shouldn’t we just dash up?
    It won’t take a minute.’ She repeated the siren smile. ‘Do let’s.
    Do!’ And without waiting for the result of her plebiscite she
    walked rapidly towards the stairs.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>I followed her. But before I had taken five steps, the floor,
    the walls of the room seemed to fade into the distance. There
    was a roaring in my ears. It grew suddenly dark. I felt myself
    falling. For the second time since breakfast I lost consciousness.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>When I came to, I was lying on the floor, with my head on
    Mrs. Aldwinkle’s knees; and she was dabbing my forehead with
    a wet sponge. The first objects of which I was aware were her
    bright blue eyes hanging over me, very close, very bright and
    alarming. ‘Poor fellow,’ she was saying, ‘poor fellow.’ Then,
    looking up, she shouted angrily to the owners of the various legs
    and skirts which I distinguished mistily to right and left of me:
    ‘Stand back, you must stand back! Do you want to suffocate
    the poor fellow?’</p>

    <div><span class='pageno' title='175' id='Page_175'></span><h1>PART III<br/> <span class='sub-head'>THE LOVES OF THE PARALLELS</span></h1></div>

    <h2>CHAPTER I</h2>

    <p class='pindent'>Do all he could, Lord Hovenden had somehow found it impossible,
    these last few days, to get Irene for a moment to himself.
    The change had come about almost suddenly, just after that fellow
    Chelifer had made his appearance. Before he came, there had
    been a time—beginning, strangely enough, almost as suddenly as
    it had ended—a time of blissful happiness. Whenever during
    those days an opportunity for a <span class='it'>tête-à-tête</span> presented itself Irene had
    been always at hand and, what was more, always delighted to seize
    the opportunity. They had been for long walks together, they had
    swum together far out into the sea, sat together in the gardens,
    sometimes talking, sometimes silent; but very happy, whether
    they spoke or not. He had talked to her about motoring and
    dancing and shooting, and occasionally, feeling rather shamefaced
    and embarrassed by the disquieting gravity of the subject, about
    the working classes. And Irene had listened with pleasure to
    everything he said and had talked too. They found that they had
    many tastes in common. It had been an enchantment while it
    lasted. And then, all at once, with the coming of that creature
    Chelifer, it all came to an end. Irene was never on the spot when
    opportunities offered, she never suggested spontaneously, as once
    or twice, during the heavenly time, she had actually done, that they
    should go for a walk together. She had no time to talk to him;
    her thoughts, it seemed, were elsewhere, as with grave and preoccupied
    face she hurried mysteriously about the palace and the
    gardens. With an extreme anguish of spirit Lord Hovenden
    observed that it was always in the direction of Chelifer that Irene
    seemed to be hurrying. Did he slip out unobtrusively into the
    garden after lunch, Irene was sure, a moment later, to slip out after
    him. When he proposed a stroll with Calamy or Mr. Cardan,
    Irene always asked, shyly but with the pallid resolution of one who
    by an effort of will overcomes a natural weakness for the sake of
    some all-important cause, to be allowed to join the party. And if
    ever Chelifer and Miss Thriplow happened to find themselves for
    a moment together, Irene was always certain to come gliding
    silently after them.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>For all this Lord Hovenden could find only one explanation.
    She was in love with the man. True, she never made any effort
    to talk to him when she was in his company; she seemed even
    rather intimidated by his polished silences, his pointedly insincere
    formulas of courtesy and compliment. And for his part Chelifer,
    as far as his rival could see, behaved with a perfect correctitude.
    Too correctly, indeed, in Hovenden’s opinion. He couldn’t
    tolerate the fellow’s sarcastic politeness; the man ought to be more
    human with little Irene. Lord Hovenden would have liked to
    wring his neck; wring it for two mutually exclusive offences—luring
    the girl on and being too damned stand-offish. And she
    looked so wretched. Looking out of its square window in the thick
    bright bell of copper hair, the little face, so childish in the largeness
    and limpidity of the eyes, in the shortness of the upper lip, had been,
    these last days, the face of a pathetic, not a merry child. Lord
    Hovenden could only suppose that she was pining with love for
    that creature—though what the devil she contrived to see in him
    he, for one, couldn’t imagine. And it was so obvious, too, that old
    Lilian was also quite gone on the fellow and making a fool of herself
    about him. Did she want to compete with her Aunt Lilian?
    There’d be the devil and all to pay if Mrs. Aldwinkle discovered
    that Irene was trying to cut her out. The more he thought of
    the wretched business, the wretcheder it seemed. Lord Hovenden
    was thoroughly miserable.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>So too was Irene. But not for the reasons Lord Hovenden
    supposed. It was true that she had spent most of her days since
    Chelifer’s arrival in following the new guest like an unhappy shadow.
    But it had not been on her own account, not at her own desire.
    Chelifer did indeed intimidate her; so far Lord Hovenden had
    guessed aright. He had been hopelessly at fault in imagining
    that Irene adored the man in spite of her fear of him. If she
    followed him about, it was because Mrs. Aldwinkle had asked her
    to. And if she looked unhappy, it was because Aunt Lilian was
    unhappy—and a little, too, because the task which Aunt Lilian
    had set her was a disagreeable one; disagreeable not only in itself,
    but because it prevented her from continuing those pleasant talks
    with Hovenden. Ever since that evening when Aunt Lilian
    twitted her on her coldness and her blindness, Irene had made a
    point of seeing Hovenden as much as she could. She wanted to
    prove that Aunt Lilian had been wrong. She wasn’t cold, she
    wasn’t blind; she could see as clearly as any one when people liked
    her, and she could be as warmly appreciative. And really, after
    the episodes with Jacques, Mario and Peter, it wasn’t fair of Aunt
    Lilian to tease her like that. It simply wasn’t. Moved by an
    indignant desire to confute Aunt Lilian as quickly as possible, she
    had positively made advances to Hovenden; he was so shy that,
    if she hadn’t, it would have been months before she could have
    offered her aunt anything like convincing rebuttal of her imputation.
    She had talked with him, gone for walks with him, quite
    prepared to feel at any moment the infinitude of passion. But the
    affair passed off, somehow, very differently from the others. She
    began to feel something indeed, but something quite unlike that
    which she had felt for Peter and Jacques. For them it had been
    a fizzy, exciting, restless feeling, intimately connected with large
    hotels, jazz bands, coloured lights and Aunt Lilian’s indefatigable
    desire to get everything out of life, her haunting fear that she was
    missing something, even in the heart of the fun. ‘Enjoy yourself,
    let yourself go,’ Aunt Lilian was always telling her. And ‘How
    handsome he is! what a lovely fellow!’ she would say as one of
    the young men passed. Irene had done her best to take Aunt
    Lilian’s advice. And it had seemed to her, sometimes, when she
    was dancing and the lights, the music, the moving crowd had
    blended together into a single throbbing whole, it had seemed
    to her that she had indeed climbed to the peak of happiness. And
    the young man, the Peter or Jacques whom Aunt Lilian had
    hypnotized her into thinking a marvel among young men, was
    regarded as the source of this bliss. Between the dances, under the
    palm trees in the garden, she had even suffered herself to be kissed;
    and the experience had been rather momentous. But when the
    time came for them to move on, Irene departed without regret.
    The fizzy feeling had gone flat. But with Hovenden it was different.
    She just liked him quietly, more and more. He was so nice
    and simple and eager and young. So young—she liked that
    particularly. Irene felt that he was really younger, in spite of his
    age, than she. The other ones had all been older, more knowing
    and accomplished; all rather bold and insolent. But Hovenden
    wasn’t in the least like that. One felt very secure with him, Irene
    thought. And there was somehow no question of love when one
    was with him—at any rate the question wasn’t at all pressing or
    urgent. Aunt Lilian used to ask her every evening how they were
    getting on and if it were getting exciting. And Irene never quite
    knew what to answer. She found very soon that she didn’t want
    to talk about Hovenden; he was so different from the others, and
    their friendship had nothing infinite about it. It was just a sensible
    friendship. She dreaded Aunt Lilian’s questions; and she found
    herself almost disliking Aunt Lilian when, in that dreadful bantering
    way of hers, she ruthlessly insisted on putting them. In some ways,
    indeed, the coming of Chelifer had been a relief; for Aunt Lilian
    became at once so profoundly absorbed in her own emotions that
    she had no time or inclination to think of any one else’s. Yes,
    that had been a great relief. But on the other hand, the work of
    supervision and espionage to which Aunt Lilian had set her made
    it all but impossible for Irene ever to talk to Hovenden. She might
    as well not be there, Irene sadly reflected. Still, poor Aunt Lilian
    was so dreadfully unhappy. One must do all one could for her.
    Poor Aunt Lilian!</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I want to know what he thinks of me,’ Aunt Lilian had said to
    her in the secret hours of the night. ‘What does he say about me
    to other people?’ Irene answered that she had never heard him
    say anything about her. ‘Then you must listen, you must keep
    your ears open.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>But however much she listened, Irene never had anything to
    report. Chelifer never mentioned Aunt Lilian. For Mrs. Aldwinkle
    that was almost worse than if he had spoken badly of her.
    To be ignored was terrible. ‘Perhaps he likes Mary,’ she had
    suggested. ‘I thought I saw him looking at her to-day in a strange,
    intent sort of way.’ And Irene had been ordered to watch them.
    But for all she could discover, Mrs. Aldwinkle’s jealousies were
    utterly unfounded. Between Chelifer and Mary Thriplow there
    passed no word or look that the most suspicious imagination could
    interpret in terms of amorous intimacy. ‘He’s queer, he’s an
    extraordinary creature.’ That was the refrain of Mrs. Aldwinkle’s
    talk about him. ‘He seems to care for nothing. So cold, such a
    fixed, frigid mask. And yet one has only to look at him—his eyes,
    his mouth—to see that underneath .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.’ And Mrs. Aldwinkle
    would shake her head and sigh. And her speculations about him
    would go rambling on and on, round and round, treading the same
    ground again and again, arriving nowhere. Poor Aunt Lilian!
    She was dreadfully unhappy.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>In her own mind Mrs. Aldwinkle had begun by saving Chelifer’s
    life. She saw herself standing there on the beach between sea and
    sky, and with the mountains in the middle distance, looking like
    one of those wonderfully romantic figures who, in the paintings of
    Augustus John, stand poised in a meditative and passionate ecstasy
    against a cosmic background. She <span class='it'>saw</span> herself—a John down
    even to her flame-coloured tunic and her emerald-green parasol.
    And at her feet, like Shelley, like Leander washed up on the sands
    of Abydos, lay the young poet, pale, naked and dead. And she
    had bent over him, had called him back to life, had raised him up
    and, figuratively speaking, had carried him off in maternal arms
    to a haven of peace where he should gather new strength and, for
    his poetry, new inspiration.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Such were the facts as they appeared to Mrs. Aldwinkle, after
    passing through the dense refractive medium of her imagination.
    Given these facts, given the resultant situation, given her character,
    it was almost necessary and inevitable that Mrs. Aldwinkle should
    feel romantically towards her latest guest. The mere fact that
    he was a new arrival, hitherto unknown, and a poet at that, would
    have been enough in any circumstances to make Mrs. Aldwinkle
    take a lively interest in the young man. But seeing that she had
    saved him from a watery grave and was now engaged in supplying
    him with inspiration, she felt something more than interest. She
    would have been disobeying the laws of her being if she had not
    fallen in love with him. Moreover, he made it easier for her by
    being so darkly and poetically handsome. And then he was queer—queer
    to the point of mysteriousness. His very coldness
    attracted while it filled her with despair.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘He can’t really be so utterly indifferent to everything and
    everybody as he makes out,’ she kept insisting to Irene.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>The desire to break down his barriers, enter into his intimacy
    and master his secret quickened her love.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>From the moment of her discovery of him, in those romantic
    circumstances which her imagination had made so much more
    romantic, Mrs. Aldwinkle had tried to take possession of Chelifer;
    she had tried to make him as much her property as the view, or
    Italian art. He became at once the best living poet; but it
    followed as a corollary that she was his only interpreter. In haste
    she had telegraphed to London for copies of all his books.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘When I think,’ she would say, leaning forward embarrassingly
    close and staring into his face with those bright, dangerous eyes of
    hers, ‘when I think how nearly you were drowned. Like Shelley
    .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.’ She shuddered. ‘It’s too appalling.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>And Chelifer would bend his full Egyptian lips into a smile and
    answer: ‘They’d have been inconsolable on the staff of the Rabbit
    Fancier,’ or something of the sort. Oh, queer, queer, queer!</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘He slides away from one,’ Mrs. Aldwinkle complained to her
    young confidante of the small hours.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>She might try to take his barriers by storm, might try to creep
    subtly into his confidence from the flank, so to speak; but Chelifer
    was never to be caught napping. He evaded her. There was
    no taking possession of him. It was for nothing, so far as Mrs.
    Aldwinkle was concerned, that he was the best living poet and she
    his prophetess.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>He evaded her—evaded her not merely mentally and spiritually,
    but even in the flesh. For after a day or two in the Cybo Malaspina
    palace he developed an almost magical faculty for disappearing.
    One moment he’d be there, walking about in the garden or sitting
    in one of the saloons; something would distract Mrs. Aldwinkle’s
    attention, and the next moment, when she turned back towards
    the place where he had been, he was gone, he was utterly vanished.
    Mrs. Aldwinkle would search; there was no trace of him to be
    found. But at the next meal he’d walk in, punctual as ever; he
    would ask his hostess politely if she had had an agreeable morning
    or afternoon, whichever the case might be, and when she asked him
    where he had been, would answer vaguely that he’d gone for a
    little walk, or that he’d been writing letters.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>After one of these disappearances Irene, who had been set by
    her aunt to hunt for him, finally ran him to earth on the top of
    the tower. She had climbed the two hundred and thirty-two steps
    for the sake of the commanding view of the whole garden and hillside
    to be obtained from the summit. If he was anywhere above
    ground, she ought to see him from the tower. But when at last,
    panting, she emerged on to the little square platform from which
    the ancient marquesses had dropped small rocks and molten lead
    on their enemies in the court below, she got a fright that nearly
    made her fall backwards down the steps. For as she came up
    through the trap-door into the sunlight, she suddenly became aware
    of what seemed, to eyes that looked up from the level of the floor,
    a gigantic figure advancing, toweringly, towards her.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Irene uttered a little scream; her heart jumped violently and
    seemed to stop beating.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Allow me,’ said a very polite voice. The giant bent down and
    took her by the hand. It was Chelifer. ‘So you’ve climbed up
    for a bird’s-eye view of the picturesque beauties of nature?’ he
    went on, when he had helped her up through the hatchway.
    ‘I’m very partial to bird’s-eye views myself.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘You gave me such a start,’ was all that Irene could say. Her
    face was quite pale.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I’m exceedingly sorry,’ said Chelifer. There was a long and,
    for Irene, embarrassing silence.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>After a minute she went down again.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Did you find him?’ asked Mrs. Aldwinkle, when her niece
    emerged a little while later on to the terrace.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Irene shook her head. Somehow she lacked the courage to tell
    Aunt Lilian the story of her adventure. It would make her too
    unhappy to think that Chelifer was prepared to climb two hundred
    and thirty-two steps for the sake of getting out of her way.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Mrs. Aldwinkle tried to guard against his habit of vanishing
    by never, so far as it was practicable, letting him out of her sight.
    She arranged that he should always sit next to her at table. She
    took him for walks and drives in the motor car, she made him sit
    with her in the garden. It was with difficulty and only by the
    employment of stratagems that Chelifer managed to procure a
    moment of liberty and solitude. For the first few days of his stay
    Chelifer found that ‘I must go and write’ was a good excuse to
    get away. Mrs. Aldwinkle professed such admiration for him in
    his poetical capacity that she could not decently refuse to let him
    go. But she soon found a way of controlling such liberty as
    he could get in this way by insisting that he should write under
    the ilex trees, or in one of the mouldering sponge-stone grottoes
    hollowed in the walls of the lower terrace. Vainly Chelifer protested
    that he loathed writing or reading out of doors.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘These lovely surroundings,’ Mrs. Aldwinkle insisted, ‘will
    inspire you.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘But the only surroundings that really inspire me,’ said Chelifer,
    ‘are the lower middle class quarters of London, north of the
    Harrow Road, for example.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘How can you say such things?’ said Mrs. Aldwinkle.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘But I assure you,’ he protested, ‘it’s quite true.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>None the less, he had to go and write under the ilexes or in
    the grotto. Mrs. Aldwinkle, at a moderate distance, kept him
    well in sight. Every ten minutes or so she would come tip-toeing
    into his retreat, smiling, as she imagined, like a sibyl, her finger
    on her lips, to lay beside his permanently virgin sheet of paper a
    bunch of late-flowering roses, a dahlia, some Michaelmas daisies
    or a few pink berries from the spindle tree. Courteously, in some
    charming and frankly insincere formula, Chelifer would thank
    her for the gift, and with a final smile, less sibylline, but sweeter,
    tenderer, Mrs. Aldwinkle would tip-toe away again, like Egeria
    bidding farewell to King Numa, leaving her inspiration to do its
    work. It didn’t seem to do its work very well, however. For
    whenever she asked him how much he had written, he regularly
    answered ‘Nothing,’ smiling at her meanwhile that courteous and
    Sphingine smile which Mrs. Aldwinkle always found so baffling,
    so pre-eminently ‘queer.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Often Mrs. Aldwinkle would try to lead the conversation upwards
    on to those high spiritual planes from which the most satisfactory
    and romantic approach to love is to be made. Two souls that have
    acclimatized themselves to the thin air of religion, art, ethics or
    metaphysics have no difficulty in breathing the similar atmosphere
    of ideal love, whose territory lies contiguous to those of the other
    inhabitants of high mental altitudes. Mrs. Aldwinkle liked to
    approach love from the heights. One landed, so to speak, by
    aeroplane on the snowy summit of Popocatepetl, to descend by
    easy stages into the tropical <span class='it'>tierra caliente</span> in the plains below.
    But with Chelifer it was impossible to gain a footing on any height
    at all. When, for example, Mrs. Aldwinkle started rapturously
    on art and the delights of being an artist, Chelifer would modestly
    admit to being a tolerable second-rate halma player.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘But how can you speak like that?’ cried Mrs. Aldwinkle.
    ‘How can you blaspheme so against art and your own talent?
    What’s your talent for?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘For editing the Rabbit Fanciers’ Gazette, it appears,’ Chelifer
    answered, courteously smiling.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Sometimes she started on the theme of love itself; but with no
    greater success. Chelifer just politely agreed with everything
    she said, and when she pressed him for a definite opinion of his
    own replied, ‘I don’t know.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘But you must know,’ Mrs. Aldwinkle insisted, ‘you must have
    some opinion. You have had experience.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Chelifer shook his head. ‘Alas,’ he deplored, ‘never.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>It was hopeless.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘What am I to do?’ asked Mrs. Aldwinkle despairingly in the
    small hours.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Wise in the experience of eighteen years, Irene suggested that
    the best thing to do would be to think no more about him—in
    that way.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Mrs. Aldwinkle only sighed and shook her head. She had
    started loving because she believed in love, because she wanted
    to love and because a romantic opportunity had presented itself.
    She had rescued a Poet from death. How could she help loving
    him? The circumstances, the person were her invention; she
    had fallen in love, deliberately almost, with the figments of her own
    imagination. But there was no deliberately falling out again.
    The romantic yearnings had aroused those profounder instincts
    of which they were but the polite and literary emanation. The
    man was young, was beautiful—these were facts, not imaginings.
    These deep desires once started by the conscious mind from their
    sleep, once made aware of their quarry, how could they be held
    back? ‘He is a poet. For the love of poetry, for the love of
    passion and because I saved him from death, I love him.’ If that
    had been all, it might have been possible for Mrs. Aldwinkle to
    take Irene’s advice. But from the obscure caves of her being
    another voice was speaking. ‘He is young, he is beautiful. The
    days are so few and short. I am growing old. My body is thirsty.’
    How could she cease to think of him?</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘And suppose he did come to love me a little,’ Mrs. Aldwinkle
    went on, taking a perverse delight in tormenting herself in every
    possible way, ‘suppose he should come to love me just a little for
    what I am and think and do—should come to love me because, to
    begin with, I love him and admire his work, and because I understand
    what an artist feels and can sympathize with him—suppose
    all that, wouldn’t he be repelled at the same time by the fact that
    I’m old?’ She peered into the mirror. ‘My face looks terribly
    old,’ she said.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘No, no,’ protested Irene encouragingly.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘He’d be disgusted,’ Mrs. Aldwinkle went on. ‘It would be
    enough to drive him away even if he were attracted in some other
    way.’ She sighed profoundly. The tears trickled slowly down
    her sagging cheeks.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Don’t talk like that, Aunt Lilian,’ Irene implored her. ‘Don’t
    talk like that.’ She felt the tears coming into her own eyes. At
    that moment she would have done anything, given anything to
    make Aunt Lilian happy. She threw her arms round Mrs. Aldwinkle’s
    neck and kissed her. ‘Don’t be unhappy,’ she whispered.
    ‘Don’t think any more about it. What does it matter about that
    man? What does it matter? You must think only of the people
    who <span class='it'>do</span> love you. I love you, Aunt Lilian. So much, so much.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Mrs. Aldwinkle suffered herself to be a little comforted. She
    dried her eyes. ‘I shall make myself look still uglier,’ she said,
    ‘if I go on crying.’ There was a silence. Irene went on brushing
    her aunt’s hair; she hoped that Aunt Lilian had turned her
    thoughts elsewhere.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘At any rate,’ said Mrs. Aldwinkle at last, breaking the long
    silence, ‘my body is still young.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Irene was distressed. Why couldn’t Aunt Lilian think of
    something else? But her distress turned into an uneasy sense of
    embarrassment and shame as Mrs. Aldwinkle pursued the subject
    started by her last words into more and more intimate detail. In
    spite of her five years’ training in Aunt Lilian’s school, Irene felt
    profoundly shocked.</p>

    <h2>CHAPTER II</h2>

    <p class='pindent'>‘We two,’ said Mr. Cardan one late afternoon some fortnight
    after Chelifer’s arrival, ‘we two seem to be rather left out of it.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Left out of what?’ asked Mr. Falx.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Out of love,’ said Mr. Cardan. He looked down over the
    balustrade. On the next terrace below, Chelifer and Mrs. Aldwinkle
    were walking slowly up and down. On the terrace below
    that strolled the diminished and foreshortened figures of Calamy
    and Miss Thriplow. ‘And the other two,’ said Mr. Cardan, as if
    continuing aloud the enumeration which he and his companion
    had made in silence, with the eye alone, ‘your young pupil and the
    little niece, have gone for a walk in the hills. Can you ask what
    we’re left out of?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Mr. Falx nodded. ‘To tell you the truth,’ he said, ‘I don’t
    much like the atmosphere of this house. Mrs. Aldwinkle’s an
    excellent woman, of course, in many respects. But .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.’ he
    hesitated.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Yes; but .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.’ Mr. Cardan nodded. ‘I see your point.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I shall be rather glad when I have got young Hovenden away
    from here,’ said Mr. Falx.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘If you get him alone I shall be surprised.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Mr. Falx went on, shaking his head: ‘There’s a certain moral
    laxity, a certain self-indulgence.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. I confess I don’t like this
    way of life. I may be prejudiced; but I don’t like it.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Every one has his favourite vice,’ said Mr. Cardan. ‘You
    forget, Mr. Falx, that we probably don’t like <span class='it'>your</span> way of life.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I protest,’ said Mr. Falx hotly. ‘Is it possible to compare my
    way of life with the way of life in this house? Here am I, working
    incessantly for a noble cause, devoting myself to the public good .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Still,’ said Mr. Cardan, ‘they do say that there’s nothing
    more intoxicating than talking to a crowd of people and moving
    them the way you want them to go; they do say, too, that it’s
    piercingly delicious to listen to applause. And people who have
    tried both have told me that the joys of power are far preferable,
    if only because they are a good deal more enduring, to those one
    can derive from wine or love. No, no, Mr. Falx; if we chose to
    climb on to our high horses we should be as amply justified in
    disapproving of your laxity and self-indulgence as you are in disapproving
    of ours. I always notice that the most grave and awful
    denunciations of obscenity in literature are to be found precisely
    in those periodicals whose directors are most notoriously alcoholic.
    And the preachers and politicians with the greatest vanity, the
    most inordinate itch for power and notoriety, are always those
    who denounce most fiercely the corruptions of the age. One of
    the greatest triumphs of the nineteenth century was to limit the
    connotation of the word “immoral” in such a way that, for practical
    purposes, only those were immoral who drank too much or
    made too copious love. Those who indulged in any or all of the
    other deadly sins could look down in righteous indignation on the
    lascivious and the gluttonous. And not only could but can—even
    now. This exaltation of two out of the seven deadly sins is most
    unfair. In the name of all lechers and boozers I most solemnly
    protest against the invidious distinction made to our prejudice.
    Believe me, Mr. Falx, we are no more reprehensible than the rest
    of you. Indeed, compared with some of your political friends,
    I feel I have a right to consider myself almost a saint.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Still,’ said Mr. Falx, whose face, where it was not covered by
    his prophetical white beard, had become very red with ill-suppressed
    indignation, ‘you won’t persuade me out of my conviction that
    these are not the most healthy surroundings for a young fellow like
    Hovenden at the most impressionable period of his life. Be as
    paradoxical and ingenious as you like: you will not persuade me,
    I repeat.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘No need to repeat, I assure you,’ said Mr. Cardan, shaking
    his head. ‘Did you think I ever supposed I could persuade you?
    You don’t imagine I’d waste my time trying to persuade a full-grown
    man with fixed opinions of the truth of something he doesn’t
    already believe? If you were twelve years old, even if you were
    twenty, I might try. But at your age—no, no.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Then why do you argue, if you don’t want to persuade?’
    asked Mr. Falx.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘For the sake of argument,’ Mr. Cardan replied, ‘and because
    one must murder the time somehow.</p>

    <div class='poetry-container' style=''><div class='lgp'> <!-- rend=';' -->
    <p class='line0'>Come ingannar questi noiosi e lenti</p>
    <p class='line0'>Giorni di vita cui si lungo tedio</p>
    <p class='line0'>E fastidio insoffribile accompagna</p>
    <p class='line0'>Or io t’insegnero.</p>
    </div></div> <!-- end poetry block --><!-- end rend -->

    <p class='noindent'>I could write a better handbook of the art than old Parini.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I’m sorry,’ said Mr. Falx, ‘but I don’t know Italian.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Nor should I,’ said Mr. Cardan, ‘if I had your unbounded
    resources for killing time. Unhappily, I was born without much
    zeal for the welfare of the working classes.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Working classes .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.’ Mr. Falx swooped down on the words.
    Passionately he began to talk. What was that text, thought
    Mr. Cardan, about the measure with which ye mete? How fearfully
    applicable it was! For the last ten minutes he’d been boring
    poor old Mr. Falx. And now Mr. Falx had turned round and
    was paying him back with his own measure—but, oh Lord, pressed
    down and, heaven help us! running over. He looked down over
    the balustrade. On the lower terraces the couples were still
    parading up and down. He wondered what they were saying;
    he wished he were down there to listen. Boomingly, Mr. Falx
    played his prophetic part.</p>

    <h2>CHAPTER III</h2>

    <p class='pindent'>It was a pity that Mr. Cardan could not hear what his hostess
    was saying. He would have been delighted; she was talking
    about herself. It was a subject on which he specially loved to
    hear her. There were few people, he used to say, whose Authorized
    Version of themselves differed so strikingly from that Revised,
    formed of them by others. It was not often, however, that she
    gave him a chance to compare them. With Mr. Cardan she was
    always a little shy; he had known her so long.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Sometimes,’ Mrs. Aldwinkle was saying, as she walked with
    Chelifer on the second of the three terraces, ‘sometimes I wish I
    were less sensitive. I feel everything so acutely—every slightest
    thing. It’s like being .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. like being .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.’ she fumbled in the
    air with groping fingers, feeling for the right word, ‘like being
    flayed,’ she concluded triumphantly, and looked at her companion.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Chelifer nodded sympathetically.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I’m so fearfully aware,’ Mrs. Aldwinkle went on, ‘of other
    people’s thoughts and feelings. They don’t have to speak to make
    me know what they’ve got in their minds. I know it, I <span class='it'>feel</span> it
    just by seeing them.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Chelifer wondered whether she felt what was going on in his
    mind. He ventured to doubt it. ‘A wonderful gift,’ he said.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘But it has its disadvantages,’ insisted Mrs. Aldwinkle. ‘For
    example, you can’t imagine how much I suffer when people round
    me are suffering, particularly if I feel myself in any way to blame.
    When I’m ill, it makes me miserable to think of servants and
    nurses and people having to sit up without sleep and run up and
    down stairs, all because of me. I know it’s rather stupid; but,
    do you know, my sympathy for them is so .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. so .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. profound,
    that it actually prevents me from getting well as quickly
    as I should.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Dreadful,’ said Chelifer in his polite, precise voice.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘You’ve no idea how deeply all suffering affects me.’ She
    looked at him tenderly. ‘That day, that <span class='it'>first</span> day, when you
    fainted—you can’t imagine .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I’m sorry it should have had such a disagreeable effect on you,’
    said Chelifer.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘You would have felt the same yourself—in the circumstances,’
    said Mrs. Aldwinkle, uttering the last words in a significant tone.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Chelifer shook his head modestly. ‘I’m afraid,’ he answered,
    ‘I’m singularly stoical about other people’s sufferings.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Why do you always speak against yourself?’ asked Mrs.
    Aldwinkle earnestly. ‘Why do you malign your own character?
    You know you’re not what you pretend to be. You pretend to be
    so much harder and dryer than you really are. Why do you?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Chelifer smiled. ‘Perhaps,’ he said, ‘it’s to re-establish the
    universal average. So many people, you see, try to make themselves
    out softer and damper than they are. Don’t they?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Mrs. Aldwinkle ignored his question. ‘But you,’ she insisted,
    ‘I want to know about you.’ She stared into his face. Chelifer
    smiled and said nothing. ‘You won’t tell me?’ she went on.
    ‘But it doesn’t matter. I know already. I have an intuition
    about people. It’s because I’m so sensitive. I <span class='it'>feel</span> their character.
    I’m never wrong.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘You’re to be envied,’ said Chelifer.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘It’s no good thinking you can deceive me,’ she went on.
    ‘You can’t. I understand you.’ Chelifer sighed, inwardly;
    she had said that before, more than once. ‘Shall I tell you what
    you are really like?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Do.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Well, to begin with,’ she said, ‘you’re sensitive, just as sensitive
    as I am. I can see that in your face, in your actions. I can hear
    it when you speak. You can pretend to be hard and .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. and
    .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. armour-plated, but I .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Wearily, but with patience, Chelifer listened. Mrs. Aldwinkle’s
    hesitating voice, moving up and down from note to unrelated note,
    sounded in his ears. The words became blurred and vague. They
    lost their articulateness and sense. They were no more than the
    noise of the wind, a sound that accompanied, but did not interrupt
    his thoughts. Chelifer’s thoughts, at the moment, were poetical.
    He was engaged in putting the finishing touches to a little ‘Mythological
    Incident,’ the idea of which had recently occurred to him
    and to which, during the last two days, he had been giving its
    definite form. Now it was finished; a little polishing, that was
    all it needed now.</p>

    <div class='poetry-container' style=''><div class='lgp'> <!-- rend=';' -->
    <p class='line0'>Through the pale skeleton of woods</p>
    <p class='line0'>Orion walks. The north wind lays</p>
    <p class='line0'>Its cold lips to the twin steel flutes</p>
    <p class='line0'>That are his gun and plays.</p>
    <p class='line'>&#160;</p>
    <p class='line0'>Knee-deep he goes where, penny-wiser</p>
    <p class='line0'>Than all his kind who steal and hoard,</p>
    <p class='line0'>Year after year, some sylvan miser</p>
    <p class='line0'>His copper wealth has stored.</p>
    <p class='line'>&#160;</p>
    <p class='line0'>The Queen of Love and Beauty lays</p>
    <p class='line0'>In neighbouring beechen aisles her baits—</p>
    <p class='line0'>Bread-crumbs and the golden maize.</p>
    <p class='line0'>Patiently she waits.</p>
    <p class='line'>&#160;</p>
    <p class='line0'>And when the unwary pheasant comes</p>
    <p class='line0'>To fill his painted maw with crumbs,</p>
    <p class='line0'>Accurately the sporting Queen</p>
    <p class='line0'>Takes aim. The bird has been.</p>
    <p class='line'>&#160;</p>
    <p class='line0'>Secure, Orion walks her way.</p>
    <p class='line0'>The Cyprian loads, presents, makes fire.</p>
    <p class='line0'>He falls. ’Tis Venus all entire</p>
    <p class='line0'>Attached to her recumbent prey.</p>
    </div></div> <!-- end poetry block --><!-- end rend -->

    <p class='noindent'>Chelifer repeated the verses to himself and was not displeased.
    The second stanza was a little too ‘quaint,’ perhaps; a little too—how
    should he put it?—too Walter-Crane’s-picture-book. One
    might omit it altogether, perhaps; or substitute, if one could think
    of it, something more perfectly in harmony with the silver-age,
    allusive elegance of the rest. As for the last verse, that was really
    masterly. It gave Racine his <span class='it'>raison d’être</span>; if Racine had never
    existed, it would have been necessary to invent him, merely for
    the sake of those last lines.</p>

    <div class='poetry-container' style=''><div class='lgp'> <!-- rend=';' -->
    <p class='line0'>He falls. ’Tis Venus all entire</p>
    <p class='line0'>Attached to her recumbent prey.</p>
    </div></div> <!-- end poetry block --><!-- end rend -->

    <p class='noindent'>Chelifer lingered over them in ecstasy. He became aware, all at
    once, that Mrs. Aldwinkle was addressing herself to him more
    directly. From inharmoniously Aeolian, her voice became once
    more articulate.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘That’s what you’re like,’ she was saying. ‘Tell me I’m
    right. Say I understand you.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Perhaps,’ said Chelifer, smiling.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Meanwhile, on the terrace below, Calamy and Miss Thriplow
    strolled at leisure. They were discussing a subject about which
    Miss Thriplow professed a special competence; it was—to speak
    in the language of the examination room—her Special Subject.
    They were discussing Life. ‘Life’s so wonderful,’ Miss Thriplow
    was saying. ‘Always. So rich, so gay. This morning, for
    instance, I woke up and the first thing I saw was a pigeon sitting
    on the window sill—a big fat grey pigeon with a captive rainbow
    pinned to his stomach.’ (That phrase, peculiarly charming and
    felicitous, Miss Thriplow thought, had already been recorded for
    future reference in her note-books.) ‘And then high up on the
    wall above the washstand there was a little black scorpion standing
    tail-upwards, looking quite unreal, like something out of the signs
    of the Zodiac. And then Eugenia came in to call me—think of
    having one’s hot water brought by a maid called Eugenia to begin
    with!—and spent a quarter of an hour telling me about her fiancé.
    It seems that he’s so dreadfully jealous. So should I be, if I were
    engaged to a pair of such rolling eyes. But think of all that
    happening before breakfast, just casually! What extravagance!
    But Life’s so generous, so copious.’ She turned a shining face
    to her companion.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Calamy looked down at her, through half-closed eyes, smiling,
    with that air of sleepy insolence, of indolent power, characteristic
    of him, especially in his relations with women. ‘Generous!’
    he repeated. ‘Yes, I should think it was. Pigeons before breakfast.
    And at breakfast it offers you.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘As if I were a broiled kipper,’ said Miss Thriplow, laughing.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>But Calamy was not disturbed by her laughter. He continued
    to look at her between his puckered eyelids with the same steady
    insolence, the same certainty of power—a certainty so complete
    that he could afford to make no exertions; placidly, drowsily, he
    could await the inevitable triumph. He disquieted Miss Thriplow.
    That was why she liked him.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>They strolled on. Fifteen days ago they could never have
    walked like this, two on a terrace, talking at leisure of Miss Thriplow’s
    Special Subject. Their hostess would have put an end to
    any such rebellious attempt at independence in the most prompt
    and ruthless fashion. But since the arrival of Chelifer Mrs. Aldwinkle
    had been too much preoccupied with the affairs of her own
    heart to be able to take the slightest interest in the doings, the
    sayings, the comings and goings of her guests. Her gaoler’s
    vigilance was relaxed. Her guests might talk together, might
    wander off alone or in couples, might say good-night when they
    pleased; Mrs. Aldwinkle did not care. So long as they did not
    interfere with Chelifer, they might do what they liked. <span class='it'>Fay ce
    que vouldras</span> had become the rule in Cybo Malaspina’s palace.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I can never understand,’ Miss Thriplow went on, meditatively
    pursuing her Special Subject, ‘I can never understand how it is
    that everybody isn’t happy—I mean fundamentally happy, underneath;
    for of course there’s suffering, there’s pain, there are a
    thousand reasons why one can’t always be consciously happy, on
    the top, if you see what I mean. But fundamentally happy, underneath—how
    can any one help being that? Life’s so extraordinary,
    so rich and beautiful—there’s no excuse for not loving it always,
    even when one’s consciously miserable. Don’t you think so?’
    She was fairly carried away by her love of Life. She was young,
    she was ardent; she saw herself as a child who goes and turns head
    over heels, out of pure joy, in the perfumed haycocks. One could
    be as clever as one liked, but if one had that genuine love of Life
    it didn’t matter; one was saved.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I agree,’ said Calamy. ‘It’s always worth living, even at
    the worst of times. And if one happens to be in love, it’s really
    intoxicating.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Miss Thriplow glanced at him. Calamy was walking with
    bent head, his eyes fixed on the ground. There was a faint smile
    on his lips; his eyelids were almost closed, as though he were too
    drowsy to keep them apart. Miss Thriplow felt annoyed. He
    made a remark like that and then didn’t even take the trouble to
    look at her.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I don’t believe you’ve ever been in love,’ she said.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I can’t remember ever having been out of it,’ Calamy answered.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Which is the same thing as saying that you’ve never really
    been in. Not really,’ Miss Thriplow repeated. She knew what
    the real thing was like.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘And you?’ asked Calamy.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Mary Thriplow did not answer. They took two or three turns
    in silence. It was a folly, Calamy was thinking. He wasn’t
    really in love with the woman. It was a waste of time and there
    were other things far more important to be done, to be thought
    about. Other things. They loomed up enormously behind the
    distracting bustle of life, silently on the further side of the noise
    and chatter. But what were they? What was their form, their
    name, their meaning? Through the fluttering veil of movement
    it was impossible to do more than dimly guess; one might as well
    try to look at the stars through the London smoke. If one could
    stop the movement, or get away from it, then surely one would
    be able to see clearly the large and silent things beyond. But
    there was no stopping the movement and there was, somehow, no
    escaping from it. To check it was impossible; and the gesture
    of escape was ludicrous. The only sensible thing to do was to go
    on in the usual way and ignore the things outside the world of
    noise. That was what Calamy tried to do. But he was conscious,
    none the less, that the things were still there. They were still
    calmly and immutably there, however much he might agitate
    himself and distractedly pretend to ignore them. Mutely they
    claimed attention. They had claimed it, of late, with a most
    irritating persistence. Calamy’s response had been to make love
    to Mary Thriplow. That was something which ought to keep
    him well occupied. And up to a point it did. Up to a point.
    The best indoor sport, old Cardan had called it; but one demanded
    something better. Could he go on like this? Or if not, what
    should he do? The questions exasperated him. It was because
    the things were there, outside the tumult, that he had to ask them.
    They forced themselves on him, those questions. But it was
    intolerable to be bullied. He refused to let himself be bullied.
    He’d do what he damned well liked. But then, did he really
    like philandering with Mary Thriplow? In a way, no doubt,
    up to a point. But the real answer was no; frankly, no. But
    yes, yes, he insisted with another part of his mind. He did like
    it. And even if he didn’t, he’d damned well say that he did.
    And if necessary he’d damned well do what he didn’t like—just
    because he chose to. He’d do what he didn’t like; and that
    was the end of it. He worked himself up into a kind of fury.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘What are you thinking about?’ Miss Thriplow suddenly asked.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘You,’ he said; and there was a savage exasperation in his voice,
    as though he passionately resented the fact that he was thinking
    about Mary Thriplow.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘<span class='it'>Tiens!</span>’ she said on a note of polite curiosity.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘What would you say if I told you I was in love with you?’
    he asked.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I should say that I didn’t believe you.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Do you want me to compel you to believe?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I’d be most interested to know, at any rate, how you proposed
    to set about it.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Calamy halted, put his hand on Mary Thriplow’s shoulder and
    turned her round towards him. ‘By force, if necessary,’ he said,
    looking into her face.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Miss Thriplow returned his stare. He looked insolent still,
    still arrogantly conscious of power; but all the drowsiness and
    indolence that had veiled his look were now fallen away, leaving
    his face bare, as it were, and burning with a formidable and satanic
    beauty. At the sight of this strange and sudden transformation
    Miss Thriplow felt at once exhilarated and rather frightened. She
    had never seen that expression on a man’s face before. She had
    aroused passions, but never a passion so violent, so dangerous as
    this seemed to be.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘By force?’ By the tone of her voice, by the mockery of her
    smile she tried to exasperate him into yet fiercer passion.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Calamy tightened his grip on her shoulder. Under his hand the
    bones felt small and fragile. When he spoke, he found that he
    had been clenching his teeth. ‘By force,’ he said. ‘Like this.’
    And taking her head between his two hands he bent down and
    kissed her, angrily, again and again. Why do I do this? he was
    thinking. This is a folly. There are other things, important
    things. ‘Do you believe me now?’ he asked.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Mary Thriplow’s face was flushed. ‘You’re insufferable,’ she
    said. But she was not really angry with him.</p>

    <h2>CHAPTER IV</h2>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Why have you been so funny all vese days?’ Lord Hovenden
    had at last brought himself to put the long-premeditated
    question.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Funny?’ Irene echoed on another note, trying to make a joke
    of it, as though she didn’t understand what he meant. But of
    course she did understand, perfectly well.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>They were sitting in the thin luminous shadow of the olive trees.
    The bright sky looked down at them between the sparse twi-coloured
    leaves. On the parched grass about the roots of the trees
    the sunlight scattered an innumerable golden mintage. They
    were sitting at the edge of a little terrace scooped out of the steep
    slope, their legs dangling, their backs propped against the trunk
    of a hoary tree.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘You know,’ said Hovenden. ‘Why did you suddenly avoid me?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Did I?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘You know you did.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Irene was silent for a moment before she admitted: ‘Yes,
    perhaps I did.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘But why,’ he insisted, ‘why?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I don’t know,’ she answered unhappily. She couldn’t tell
    him about Aunt Lilian.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Her tone emboldened Lord Hovenden to become more insistent.
    ‘You don’t know?’ he repeated sarcastically, as though he were
    a lawyer carrying out a cross-examination. ‘Perhaps you were
    walking in your sleep all ve time.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Don’t be stupid,’ she said in a weary little voice.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘At any rate, I’m not too stupid to see vat you were running
    after vat fellow Chelifer.’ Lord Hovenden became quite red in
    the face as he spoke. For the sake of his manly dignity, it was a
    pity that his th’s should sound quite so childish.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Irene said nothing, but sat quite still, her head bent, looking
    down at the slanting grove of olives. Framed within the square-cut
    hair, her face was sad.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘If you were so much interested in him, why did you suggest
    vat we should go for a walk vis afternoon?’ he asked. ‘Perhaps
    you fought I was Chelifer.’ He was possessed by an urgent
    desire to say disagreeable and hurting things. And yet he was
    perfectly aware, all the time, that he was making a fool of himself
    and being unfair to her. But the desire was irresistible.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Why do you try to spoil everything?’ she asked with an
    exasperating sadness and patience.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I don’t try to spoil anyfing,’ Hovenden answered irritably.
    ‘I merely ask a simple question.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘You know I don’t take the slightest interest in Chelifer,’ she said.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Ven why do you trot after him all day long, like a little dog?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>The boy’s stupidity and insistence began to annoy her. ‘I
    don’t,’ she said angrily. ‘And in any case it’s no business of yours.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Oh, it’s no business of mine, is it?’ said Hovenden in a
    provocative voice. ‘Fanks for ve information.’ And he was
    pointedly silent.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>For a long time neither of them spoke. Some dark brown sheep
    with bells round their necks came straying between the trees a little
    way down the slope. With set, sad faces the two young people
    looked at them. The bells made a tinkling as the creatures moved.
    The sweet thin noise sounded, for some reason, extremely sad in
    their ears. Sad, too, was the bright sky between the leaves; profoundly
    melancholy the redder, richer light of the declining sun,
    colouring the silver leaves, the grey trunks, the parched thin grass.
    It was Hovenden who at last broke silence. His anger, his desire
    to say hurting, disagreeable things had utterly evaporated; there
    remained only the conviction that he had made a fool of himself
    and been unfair—only that and the profound aching love which
    had given his anger, his foolish cruel desire such force. ‘You know
    I don’t take the slightest interest in Chelifer.’ He hadn’t known
    but now that she had said so, and in that tone of voice, now he knew.
    One couldn’t doubt; and even if one could, was it worth doubting?</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Look here,’ he said at last, in a muffled voice, ‘I made a fool
    of myself, I’m afraid. I’ve said stupid things. I’m sorry,
    Irene. Will you forgive me?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Irene turned towards him the little square window in her hair.
    Her face looked out of it smiling. She gave him her hand. ‘One
    day I’ll tell you,’ she said.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>They sat there hand in hand for what seemed to them at once a
    very long time and a timeless instant. They said nothing, but they
    were very happy. The sun set. A grey half-night came creeping
    in under the trees. Between the black silhouetted leaves the sky
    looked exceedingly pale. Irene sighed.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I think we ought to be getting back,’ she said reluctantly.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Hovenden was the first to scramble to his feet. He offered
    Irene his hand. She took it and raised herself lightly up, coming
    forward as she rose towards him. They stood for a moment very
    close together. Lord Hovenden suddenly took her in his arms
    and kissed her again and again. Irene uttered a cry. She
    struggled, she pushed him away.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘No, no,’ she entreated, averting her face, leaning back, away
    from his kisses. ‘Please.’ And when he let her go, she covered
    her face with her hands and began to cry. ‘Why did you spoil
    it again?’ she asked through her tears. Lord Hovenden was overwhelmed
    with remorse. ‘We’d been so happy, such friends.’
    Irene dabbed her eyes with her handkerchief; but her voice still
    came sobbingly.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I’m a brute,’ said Hovenden; and he spoke with such a passion
    of self-condemnation that Irene couldn’t help laughing. There
    was something positively comic about a repentance so sudden and
    whole-hearted.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘No, you’re not a brute,’ she said. Her sobs and her laughter
    were getting curiously mixed up together. ‘You’re a dear and I
    like you. So much, so much. But you mustn’t do that, I don’t
    know why. It spoils everything. I was a goose to cry. But
    somehow .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.’ She shook her head. ‘I like you so much,’ she
    repeated. ‘But not like that. Not now. Some day, perhaps.
    Not now. You won’t spoil it again? Promise.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Lord Hovenden promised devoutly. They walked home
    through the grey night of the olive orchard.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>That evening at dinner the conversation turned on feminism.
    Under pressure from Mr. Cardan, Mrs. Aldwinkle reluctantly
    admitted that there <span class='it'>was</span> a considerable difference between Maud
    Valerie White and Beethoven and that Angelica Kauffmann compared
    unfavourably with Giotto. But she protested, on the other
    hand, that in matters of love women were, definitely, treated
    unfairly.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘We claim <span class='it'>all</span> your freedom,’ she said dramatically.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Knowing that Aunt Lilian liked her to take part in the conversation,
    and remembering—for she had a good memory—a
    phrase that her aunt used at one time to employ frequently, but
    which had recently faded out of the catalogue of her favourite
    locutions, Irene gravely brought it out. ‘Contraception,’ she
    pronounced, ‘has rendered chastity superfluous.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Mr. Cardan leaned back in his chair and roared with laughter.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>But across the prophetical face of Mr. Falx there passed a pained
    expression. He looked anxiously at his pupil, hoping that he had
    not heard, or at least had not understood what had just been said.
    He caught Mr. Cardan’s winking eye and frowned. Could corruption
    and moral laxity go further? his glance seemed to inquire.
    He looked at Irene; that such a youthful, innocent appearance
    should be wedded to so corrupt a mind appalled him. He felt
    glad, for Hovenden’s sake, that their stay in this bad house was not
    to last much longer. If it were not for the necessity of behaving
    politely, he would have left the place at once; like Lot, he would
    have shaken the dust of it from his feet.</p>

    <h2>CHAPTER V</h2>

    <p class='pindent'>‘When the butcher’s boy tells you in confidence, and with an
    eye to a tip, that the grocer’s brother has a very fine piece of very
    old sculpture which he is prepared to part with for a moderate consideration,
    what do you suppose he means?’ Walking slowly
    up-hill among the olive trees, Mr. Cardan meditatively put the
    question.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I suppose he means what he says,’ said Miss Thriplow.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘No doubt,’ said Mr. Cardan, halting for a moment to wipe his
    face, which shone, even though the sun came only slantingly through
    the thin foliage of the olive trees, with an excess of heat. Miss
    Thriplow in the green uniform of the musical comedy schoolgirl
    looked wonderfully cool and neat beside her unbuttoned companion.
    ‘But the point is this: what exactly is it that he says? What is
    a butcher’s boy likely to mean when he says that a piece of sculpture
    is very beautiful and very old?’ They resumed their climbing.
    Below them, through a gap in the trees, they could see the roofs and
    the slender tower of the Cybo Malaspina palace, and below these
    again the dolls’ village of Vezza, the map-like plain, the sea.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I should ask him, if you want to know.’ Miss Thriplow spoke
    rather tartly; it was not to talk of butchers’ boys that she had
    accepted Mr. Cardan’s invitation to go for a walk with him. She
    wanted to hear Mr. Cardan’s views on life, literature and herself.
    He knew a thing or two, it seemed to her, about all these subjects.
    Too many things, and not exactly the right ones at that, about
    the last. Too many—it was precisely for that reason that Miss
    Thriplow liked to talk with him. Horrors always exercise a
    fascination. And now, after the prolonged silence, he was starting
    on butchers’ boys.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I have asked him,’ said Mr. Cardan. ‘But do you suppose
    there’s anything intelligible to be got out of him? All I can
    gather is that the sculpture represents a man—not a whole man, part
    of a man, and that it’s made of marble. Beyond that I can
    discover nothing.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Why do you want to discover?’ asked Miss Thriplow.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Mr. Cardan shook his head. ‘Alas,’ he said, ‘for sordid reasons.
    You remember what the poet wrote?</p>

    <div class='poetry-container' style=''><div class='lgp'> <!-- rend=';' -->
    <p class='line0'>I have been in love, in debt and in drink</p>
    <p class='line0'>&ensp;&ensp;&ensp;&ensp;This many and many a year;</p>
    <p class='line0'>And these are three evils too great, one would think,</p>
    <p class='line0'>&ensp;&ensp;&ensp;&ensp;For one poor mortal to bear.</p>
    <p class='line0'>’Twas love that first drove me to drinking,</p>
    <p class='line0'>&ensp;&ensp;&ensp;&ensp;And drinking first drove me to debt,</p>
    <p class='line0'>And though I have struggled and struggled and strove,</p>
    <p class='line0'>&ensp;&ensp;&ensp;&ensp;I cannot get out of them yet.</p>
    <p class='line0'>There’s nothing but money can cure me</p>
    <p class='line0'>&ensp;&ensp;&ensp;&ensp;And ease me of all my pain;</p>
    <p class='line0'>’Twill pay all my debts and remove all my lets,</p>
    <p class='line0'>And my mistress who cannot endure me</p>
    <p class='line0'>&ensp;&ensp;&ensp;&ensp;Will turn to and love me again,</p>
    <p class='line0'>&ensp;&ensp;&ensp;&ensp;Will turn to and love me again.</p>
    </div></div> <!-- end poetry block --><!-- end rend -->

    <p class='noindent'>There’s a summary of a lifetime for you. One has no regrets,
    of course. But still, one does need cash—needs it the more, alas,
    the older one grows, and has less of it. What other reason, do
    you think, would send me sweating up this hill to talk with the
    village grocer about his brother’s statuary?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘You mean that you’d buy it if it were worth anything?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘At the lowest possible price,’ confirmed Mr. Cardan. ‘And
    sell it at the highest. If I had ever adopted a profession,’ he
    continued, ‘I think it would have been art dealing. It has the
    charm of being more dishonest than almost any other form of
    licensed brigandage in existence. And dishonest, moreover, in a
    much more amusing way. Financiers, it is true, can swindle on a
    larger scale; but their swindling is mostly impersonal. You may
    ruin thousands of trusting investors; but you haven’t the pleasure
    of knowing your victims. Whereas if you’re an art dealer, your
    swindling, though less extensive, is most amusingly personal.
    You meet your victims face to face and do them down. You
    take advantage of the ignorance or urgent poverty of the vendor
    to get the work for nothing. You then exploit the snobbery and
    the almost equally profound ignorance of the rich buyer to make
    him take the stuff off your hands at some fantastic price. What
    huge elation one must feel when one has succeeded in bringing
    off some splendid <span class='it'>coup</span>! bought a blackened panel from some
    decayed gentleman in need of a new suit, cleaned it up and sold
    it again to a rich snob who thinks that a collection and the reputation
    of being a patron of the ancient arts will give him a leg up in
    society—what vast Rabelaisian mirth! No, decidedly, if I were
    not Diogenes and idle, I would be Alexander, critic and dealer.
    A really gentlemanly profession.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Can you never be serious?’ asked Miss Thriplow, who would
    have preferred the conversation to turn on something more nearly
    related to her own problems.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Mr. Cardan smiled at her. ‘Can anybody fail to be serious
    when it’s a question of making money?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I give you up,’ said Miss Thriplow.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I’m sorry,’ Mr. Cardan protested. ‘But perhaps it’s all for
    the best. Meanwhile, what about that butcher’s boy? What
    <span class='it'>does</span> he mean by a bit of very old sculpture? Is it the head of
    some rich Etruscan cheese-monger of Lunae that they’ve dug up?
    Some long-nosed primitive oriental with a smile of imbecile rapture
    on his face? Or a fragment of one of his Hellenized posterity,
    reclining on the lid of his sarcophagus as though along his prandial
    couch and staring blankly out of a head that might, if Praxiteles
    had carved it, have been Apollo’s, but which the Etruscan mason
    has fattened into an all too human grossness? Or perhaps it’s
    a Roman bust, so thoroughly real, life-like and up-to-date that, but
    for the toga, we might almost take it for our old friend Sir William
    Midrash, the eminent civil servant. Or perhaps—and I should
    like that better—perhaps it dates from that strange, grey Christian
    dawn that followed the savage night into which the empire went
    down. I can imagine some fragment from Modena or Toscanella—some
    odd, unpredictable figure bent by excess of faith into the
    most profoundly expressive and symbolic of attitudes: a monster
    physically, a barbarism, a little mumbo-jumbo, but glowing so
    passionately with inward life—it may be lovely, it may be malignant—that
    it is impossible to look at it with indifference or merely as
    a shape, ugly or beautiful. Yes. I should like the thing to be a
    piece of Romanesque carving. I’d give the butcher’s boy an
    extra five francs if it were. But if it turned out to be one of those
    suave Italian Gothic saints elegantly draped and leaning a little
    sideways, like saplings in the mystical breeze—and it might be,
    you never can tell—I’d deduct five francs. Not but what it
    mightn’t fetch just as much in the American market. But how they
    bore me, those accomplished Gothicisms, how they bore me!’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>They were at the top of the hill. Emerging from the sloping
    forest of olive trees, the road now ran along a bare and almost level
    ridge. Some little way off, where the ground began to rise once
    more towards further heights, one could see a cluster of houses and
    a church tower. Mr. Cardan pointed.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘There,’ he said, ‘we shall find out what the butcher’s boy
    really did mean. But in the meantime it’s amusing to go on
    speculating. For example, suppose it were a chunk of a bas-relief
    designed by Giotto. Eh? Something so grand, so spiritually and
    materially beautiful that you could fall down and worship it. But
    I’d be very well pleased, I assure you, with a bit of a sarcophagus
    from the earliest renaissance. Some figure marvellously bright,
    ethereal and pure, like an angel, but an angel, not of the kingdom
    of heaven; an angel of some splendid and, alas, imaginary kingdom
    of earth. Ah,’ pursued Mr. Cardan, shaking his head, ‘that’s the
    kingdom one would like to live in—the kingdom of ancient Greece,
    purged of every historical Greek that ever existed, and colonized
    out of the imaginations of modern artists, scholars and philosophers.
    In such a world one might live positively, so to speak—live with
    the stream, in the direction of the main current—not negatively,
    as one has to now, in reaction against the general trend of existence.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Positive and negative living. Miss Thriplow made a mental
    note of the notions. It might be an idea to work up in an article.
    It might even throw light on her own problems. Perhaps what
    one suffered from was the sense of being negative and in reaction.
    More positiveness—that was what one needed. The conversation,
    she thought, seemed to be growing more serious. They walked
    on for a moment in silence. Mr. Cardan broke it at last.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Or can it possibly be,’ he said, ‘that the grocer’s brother has
    lighted on some fragmentary rough-hewing by Michelangelo,
    begun in a frenzy while he was living among these mountains and
    abandoned when he left them? Some tormented Slave, struggling
    to free himself more of his inward than his outward chains; straining
    with more than human violence, but at the same time pensively,
    with a passion concentrated upon itself instead of explosively dissipated,
    as in the baroque, which all too fatally and easily developed
    out of him? And after all our hopes and speculations, that’s
    what my treasure will probably resolve itself into—a bit of seventeenth-century
    baroque. I picture the torso of a waltzing angel
    in the middle of a whirlwind of draperies turning up to heaven
    the ecstatic eye of the clergyman in a Lyceum melodrama; or
    perhaps a Bacchus, dancing by a miracle of virtuosity on one marble
    leg, his mouth open in a tipsy laugh and the fingers of both hands
    splayed out to their fullest extent, just to show what can be done
    by a sculptor who knows his business; or the bust of a prince,
    prodigiously alive and characteristic, wearing a collar of Brussels
    lace imitated in stone down to the finest thread. The butcher’s
    boy kept on insisting that the thing was very beautiful as well as
    very old. And it’s obvious, now I come to think of it, that he’d
    really and sincerely like baroque and baroque only, just because it
    would be so familiar to him, because it would be just like everything
    he had been brought up to admire. For by some strange and
    malignant fate the Italians, once arrived at baroque, seem to have
    got stuck there. They are still up to the eyes in it. Consider
    their literature, their modern painting and architecture, their
    music—it’s all baroque. It gesticulates rhetorically, it struts
    across stages, it sobs and bawls in its efforts to show you how
    passionate it is. In the midst, like a huge great Jesuit church,
    stands d’Annunzio.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I should have thought,’ said Miss Thriplow with barbed
    ingenuousness, ‘that you’d have liked that sort of elaboration and
    virtuosity. It’s “amusing”—isn’t that the word?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘True,’ answered Mr. Cardan, ‘I like being amused. But I
    demand from my art the added luxury of being moved. And,
    somehow, one can’t feel emotion about anything so furiously and
    consciously emotional as these baroque things. It’s not by making
    wild and passionate gestures that an artist can awake emotion in
    the spectator. It isn’t done that way. These seventeenth-century
    Italians tried to express passion by making use of passionate gestures.
    They only succeeded in producing something that either leaves us
    cold—though it may, as you say, amuse us—or which actually
    makes us laugh. Art which is to move its contemplator must
    itself be still; it is almost an aesthetic law. Passion must never
    be allowed to dissipate itself in wild splashings and boilings over.
    It must be shut up, so to speak, and compressed and moulded by
    the intellect. Concentrated within a calm, untroubled form, its
    strength will irresistibly move. Styles that protest too much are not
    fit for serious, tragical use. They are by nature suited to comedy,
    whose essence is exaggeration. That is why good romantic art
    is so rare. Romanticism, of which the seventeenth-century baroque
    style is a queer sub-species, makes violent gestures; it relies on
    violent contrasts of light and shade, on stage effects; it is ambitious
    to present you with emotion in the raw and palpitating form.
    That is to say, the romantic style is in essence a comic style. And,
    except in the hands of a few colossal geniuses, romantic art is, in
    point of historical fact, almost always comic. Think of all the
    hair-raising romances written during the later eighteenth and
    earlier nineteenth centuries; now that the novelty has worn off
    them, we perceive them for what they are—the broadest comedies.
    Even writers of a great and genuine talent were betrayed by the
    essentially comic nature of the style into being farcical when they
    meant to be romantically tragical. Balzac, for example, in a
    hundred serious passages; George Sand in all her earlier novels;
    Beddoes, when he tries to make his <span class='it'>Death’s Jest Book</span> particularly
    blood-curdling; Byron in <span class='it'>Cain</span>; de Musset in <span class='it'>Rolla</span>. And what
    prevents Herman Melville’s <span class='it'>Moby Dick</span> from being a really great
    book is precisely the pseudo-Shakespearean idiom in which what
    are meant to be the most tragical passages are couched—an idiom
    to whose essential suitability to comedy the exceptional tragic
    successes of Shakespeare himself, of Marlowe and a few others
    has unfortunately blinded all their imitators. Moreover, if the
    romantic style is essentially fitted to comedy, it is also true, conversely,
    that the greatest comic works have been written in a
    romantic style. <span class='it'>Pantagruel</span> and the <span class='it'>Contes Drolatiques</span>; the
    conversation of Falstaff and Wilkins Micawber; Aristophanes’
    <span class='it'>Frogs</span>; <span class='it'>Tristram Shandy</span>. And who will deny that the finest
    passages in Milton’s reverberating prose are precisely those where
    he is writing satirically and comically? A comic writer is a very
    large and copious man with a zest for all that is earthy, who unbuttons
    himself and lets himself freely go, following wherever
    his indefatigably romping spirit leads him. The unrestrained,
    exaggerated, wildly gesticulating manner which is the romantic
    manner exactly fulfils his need.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Miss Thriplow listened with growing attention. This was
    serious; moreover, it seemed really to touch her own problems.
    In her new novel she had done her best to throw off the light
    satiric vestments in which, in the past, she had clothed her tendernesses;
    this time, she had decided to give the public her naked
    heart. Mr. Cardan was making her wonder whether she wasn’t
    exposing it in too palpitating a manner.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘When you come to pictorial art,’ Mr. Cardan went on, ‘you
    find that seriousness and romanticism are even less frequently
    combined than in literature. The greatest triumphs of the nineteenth-century
    romantic style are to be found precisely among the
    comedians and the makers of grotesques. Daumier, for example,
    produced at once the most comic and the most violently romantic
    pictures ever made. And Doré, when he ceased from trying to
    paint serious pictures in the romantic style—with what involuntarily
    ludicrous results I leave you to recall to mind—and applied
    himself to illustrating <span class='it'>Don Quixote</span> and the <span class='it'>Contes Drolatiques</span>
    in the same romantic terms, Doré produced masterpieces. Indeed,
    the case of Doré quite clinches my argument. Here was a man
    who did precisely the same romantic things in both his serious and
    his comic works, and who succeeded in making what was meant
    to be sublime ludicrous and what was meant to be ludicrous sublime
    in its rich, extravagant, romantic grotesqueness.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>They had passed the outlying houses of the village and were
    walking slowly up its single, steep street.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘That’s very true,’ said Miss Thriplow pensively. She was
    wondering whether she oughtn’t to tone down a little that description
    in her new novel of the agonies of the young wife when she
    discovers that her husband had been unfaithful to her. A dramatic
    moment, that. The young wife has just had her first baby—with
    infinite suffering—and now, still very frail, but infinitely happy,
    lies convalescent. The handsome young husband, whom she
    adores and who, she supposes, adores her, comes in with the afternoon
    post. He sits down by her bed, and putting the bunch of
    letters on the counterpane begins opening his correspondence.
    She opens hers too. Two boring notes. She tosses them aside.
    Without looking at the address, she opens another envelope, unfolds
    the sheet within and reads: ‘Doodlums darling, I shall be waiting
    for you to-morrow evening in our love-nest.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.’ She looks at the
    envelope; it is addressed to her husband. Her feelings .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
    Miss Thriplow wondered; yes, perhaps, in the light of what
    Mr. Cardan had been saying, the passage was a little too palpitating.
    Particularly that bit where the baby is brought in to be suckled.
    Miss Thriplow sighed; she’d read through the chapter critically
    when she got home.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Well,’ said Mr. Cardan, interrupting the course of her thoughts,
    ‘here we are. It only remains to find out where the grocer lives,
    and to find out from the grocer where his brother lives, and to
    find out from the brother what his treasure is and how much he
    wants for it, and then to find some one to buy it for fifty thousand
    pounds—and we’ll live happily ever after. What?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>He stopped a passing child and put his question. The child
    pointed up the street. They walked on.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>At the door of his little shop sat the grocer, unoccupied at the
    moment, taking the sun and air and looking on at such stray drops
    from the flux of life as trickled occasionally along the village street.
    He was a stout man with a large fleshy face that looked as though
    it had been squeezed perpendicularly, so broadly it bulged, so
    close to one another the horizontal lines of eyes, nose and mouth.
    His cheeks and chin were black with five days’ beard—for to-day
    was Thursday and shaving-time only came round on Saturday
    evening. Small, sly, black eyes looked out from between pouchy
    lids. He had thick lips, and his teeth when he smiled were yellow.
    A long white apron, unexpectedly clean, was tied at neck and waist
    and fell down over his knees. It was the apron that struck Miss
    Thriplow’s imagination—the apron and the thought that this man
    wore it, draped round him like an ephod, when he was cutting up
    ham and sausages, when he was serving out sugar with a little
    shovel.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘How extraordinarily nice and jolly he looks!’ she said enthusiastically,
    as they approached.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Does he?’ asked Mr. Cardan in some surprise. To his eyes
    the man looked like a hardly mitigated ruffian.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘So simple and happy and contented!’ Miss Thriplow went
    on. ‘One envies them their lives.’ She could almost have wept
    over the little shovel—momentarily the masonic emblem of pre-lapsarian
    ingenuousness. ‘We make everything so unnecessarily
    complicated for ourselves, don’t we?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Do we?’ said Mr. Cardan.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘These people have no doubts, or after-thoughts,’ pursued
    Miss Thriplow, ‘or—what’s worse than after-thoughts—simultaneous-thoughts.
    They know what they want and what’s
    right; they feel just what they ought to feel by nature—like
    the heroes in the <span class='it'>Iliad</span>—and act accordingly. And the
    result is, I believe, that they’re much better than we are, much
    gooder, we used to say when we were children; the word’s
    more expressive. Yes, much gooder. Now you’re laughing
    at me!’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Mr. Cardan twinkled at her with benevolent irony. ‘I assure
    you I’m not,’ he declared.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘But I shouldn’t mind if you were,’ said Miss Thriplow. ‘For
    after all, in spite of all that you people may say or think, it’s the
    only thing that matters—being good.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I entirely agree,’ said Mr. Cardan.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘And it’s easier if you’re like that.’ She nodded in the
    direction of the white apron.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Mr. Cardan nodded, a little dubiously.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Sometimes,’ Miss Thriplow continued, with a gush of confidence
    that made her words come more rapidly, ‘sometimes,
    when I get on a bus and take my ticket from the conductor, I
    suddenly feel the tears come into my eyes at the thought of this
    life, so simple and straightforward, so easy to live well, even if it
    is a hard one—and perhaps, too, just because it is a hard one.
    Ours is so difficult.’ She shook her head.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>By this time they were within a few yards of the shopkeeper, who,
    seeing that they were proposing to enter his shop, rose from his
    seat at the door and darted in to take up his stand, professionally,
    behind the counter.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>They followed him into the shop. It was dark within and
    filled with a violent smell of goat’s milk cheese, pickled tunny,
    tomato preserve and highly flavoured sausage.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Whee-ew!’ said Miss Thriplow, and pulling out a small
    handkerchief, she took refuge with the ghost of Parma violets.
    It was a pity that these simple lives in white aprons had to be
    passed amid such surroundings.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Rather deafening, eh?’ said Mr. Cardan, twinkling. ‘Puzza,’
    he added, turning to the shopkeeper. ‘It stinks.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>The man looked at Miss Thriplow, who stood there, her
    nose in the oasis of her handkerchief, and smiled indulgently.
    ‘I forestieri sono troppo delicati. Troppo delicati,’ he
    repeated.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘He’s quite right,’ said Mr. Cardan. ‘We are. In the end,
    I believe, we shall come to sacrifice everything to comfort and
    cleanliness. Personally, I always have the greatest suspicion of
    your perfectly hygienic and well-padded Utopias. As for this
    particular stink,’ he sniffed the air, positively with relish, ‘I don’t
    really know what you have to object to it. It’s wholesome, it’s
    natural, it’s tremendously historical. The shops of the Etruscan
    grocers, you may be sure, smelt just as this does. No, on the whole,
    I entirely agree with our friend here.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Still,’ said Miss Thriplow, speaking in a muffled voice through
    the folds of her handkerchief, ‘I shall stick to my violets. However
    synthetic.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Having ordered a couple of glasses of wine, one of which he
    offered to the grocer, Mr. Cardan embarked on a diplomatic conversation
    about the object of his visit. At the mention of his
    brother and the sculpture, the grocer’s face took on an expression
    of altogether excessive amiability. He bent his thick lips into
    smiles; deep folds in the shape of arcs of circles appeared in his
    fat cheeks. He kept bowing again and again. Every now and
    then he joyously laughed, emitting a blast of garlicky breath that
    smelt so powerfully like acetylene that one was tempted to put a
    match to his mouth in the hope that he would immediately break
    out into a bright white flame. He confirmed all that the butcher’s
    boy had said. It was all quite true; he had a brother; and his
    brother had a piece of marble statuary that was beautiful and old,
    old, old. Unfortunately, however, his brother had removed from
    this village and had gone down to live in the plain, near the lake of
    Massaciuccoli, and the sculpture had gone with him. Mr. Cardan
    tried to find out from him what the work of art looked like; but
    he could gather nothing beyond the fact that it was beautiful and
    old and represented a man.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘It isn’t like this, I suppose?’ asked Mr. Cardan, bending
    himself into the attitude of a Romanesque demon and making a
    demoniac grimace.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>The grocer thought not. Two peasant women who had come
    in for cheese and oil looked on with a mild astonishment. These
    foreigners .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Or like this?’ He propped his elbow on the counter and,
    half reclining, conjured up, by his attitude and his fixed smile of
    imbecile ecstasy, visions of Etruscan revelry.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Again the grocer shook his head.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Or like this?’ He rolled his eyes towards heaven, like a
    baroque saint.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>But the grocer seemed doubtful even of this.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Mr. Cardan wiped his forehead. ‘If I could make myself look
    like a Roman bust,’ he said to Miss Thriplow, ‘or a bas-relief of
    Giotto, or a renaissance sarcophagus, or an unfinished group by
    Michelangelo, I would. But it’s beyond my powers.’ He
    shook his head. ‘For the moment I give it up.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>He took out his pocket-book and asked for the brother’s address.
    The grocer gave directions; Mr. Cardan carefully took them down.
    Smiling and bowing, the grocer ushered them out into the street,
    Miss Thriplow vailed her handkerchief and drew a breath of air—redolent,
    however, even here, of organic chemistry.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Patience,’ said Mr. Cardan, ‘tenacity of purpose. One needs
    them here.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>They walked slowly down the street. They had only gone a
    few yards when the noise of a violent altercation made them turn
    round. At the door of the shop the grocer and his two customers
    were furiously disputing. Voices were raised, the grocer’s deep and
    harsh, the women’s shrill; hands moved in violent and menacing
    gestures, yet gracefully withal, as was natural in the hands of
    those whose ancestors had taught the old masters of painting all
    they ever knew of expressive and harmonious movement.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘What is it?’ asked Miss Thriplow. ‘It looks like the
    preliminaries of a murder.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Mr. Cardan smiled and shrugged his shoulders. ‘It’s nothing,’
    he said. ‘They’re just calling him a robber; that’s all.’ He
    listened for a moment more to the shouting. ‘A little question
    of short weight, it seems.’ He smiled at Miss Thriplow. ‘Should
    we go on?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>They turned away; the sound of the dispute followed them
    down the street. Miss Thriplow did not know whether to be
    grateful to Mr. Cardan for saying nothing more about her friend
    in the white apron. These simple folk .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. the little shovel for
    the sugar .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. so much better, so much <span class='it'>gooder</span> than we.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. In
    the end she almost wished that he would say something about it.
    Mr. Cardan’s silence seemed more ironic than any words.</p>

    <h2>CHAPTER VI</h2>

    <p class='pindent'>The sun had set. Against a pale green sky the blue and purple
    mountains lifted a jagged silhouette. Mr. Cardan found himself
    alone in the middle of the flat plain at their feet. He was standing
    on the bank of a broad ditch, brimming with gleaming water, that
    stretched away in a straight line apparently for miles across the land,
    to be lost in the vague twilight distance. Here and there a line of
    tall thin poplars marked the position of other dykes, intersecting
    the plain in all directions. There was not a house in sight, not a
    human being, not even a cow or a grazing donkey. Far away on
    the slopes of the mountains, whose blue and purple were rapidly
    darkening to a uniform deep indigo, little yellow lights began to
    appear, singly or in clusters, attesting the presence of a village or a
    solitary farm. Mr. Cardan looked at them with irritation; very
    pretty, no doubt, but he had seen it done better on many musical
    comedy stages. And in any case, what was the good of a light six
    or seven miles away, on the hills, when he was standing in the middle
    of the plain, with nobody in sight, night coming on, and these
    horrible ditches to prevent one from taking the obvious bee-line
    towards civilization? He had been a fool, he reflected, three or
    four times over: a fool to refuse Lilian’s offer of the car and go on
    foot (this fetish of exercise! still, he would certainly have to cut
    down his drinking if he didn’t take it); a fool to have started
    so late in the afternoon; a fool to have accepted Italian estimates
    of distance; and a fool to have followed directions for finding the
    way given by people who mixed up left and right and, when you
    insisted on knowing which they meant, told you that either would
    bring you where you wanted to go. The path which Mr. Cardan
    had been following seemed to have come to a sudden end in the
    waters of this ditch; perhaps it was a suicides’ path. The lake of
    Massaciuccoli should be somewhere on the further side of the
    ditch; but where? and how to get across? The twilight rapidly
    deepened. In a few minutes the sun would have gone down its
    full eighteen degrees below the horizon and it would be wholly
    dark. Mr. Cardan swore; but that got him no further. In the
    end he decided that the best thing to do would be to walk slowly
    and cautiously along this ditch, in the hope that in time one might
    arrive, at any rate somewhere. Meanwhile, it would be well to
    fortify oneself with a bite and a sup. He sat down on the grass
    and opening his jacket, dipped into the capacious poacher’s pockets
    excavated in its lining, producing first a loaf, then a few inches of a
    long polony, then a bottle of red wine; Mr. Cardan was always
    prepared against emergencies.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>The bread was stale, the sausage rather horsey and spiced with
    garlic; but Mr. Cardan, who had had no tea, ate with a relish.
    Still more appreciatively he drank. In a little while he felt a little
    more cheerful. Such are the little crosses, he reflected philosophically,
    the little crosses one has to bear when one sets out to earn
    money. If he got through the evening without falling into a ditch,
    he’d feel that he had paid lightly for his treasure. The greatest
    bore was these mosquitoes; he lighted a cigar and tried to fumigate
    them to a respectful distance. Without much success, however.
    Perhaps the brutes were malarial, too. There might be a little of
    the disease still hanging about in these marshes; one never knew.
    It would be tiresome to end one’s days with recurrent fever and
    an enlarged spleen. It would be tiresome, for that matter, to
    end one’s days anyhow, in one’s bed or out, naturally or unnaturally,
    by the act of God or of the King’s enemies. Mr.
    Cardan’s thoughts took on, all at once, a dismal complexion.
    Old age, sickness, decrepitude; the bath-chair, the doctor, the
    bright efficient nurse; and the long agony, the struggle for breath,
    the thickening darkness, the end, and then—how did that merry
    little song go?</p>

    <div class='poetry-container' style=''><div class='lgp'> <!-- rend=';' -->
    <p class='line0'>More work for the undertaker,</p>
    <p class='line0'>’Nother little job for the coffin-maker.</p>
    <p class='line0'>At the local cemetery they are</p>
    <p class='line0'>Very very busy with a brand new grave.</p>
    <p class='line0'>&ensp;&ensp;&ensp;&ensp;He’ll keep warm next winter.</p>
    </div></div> <!-- end poetry block --><!-- end rend -->

    <p class='noindent'>Mr. Cardan hummed the tune to himself cheerfully enough. But
    his tough, knobbly face became so hard, so strangely still, an expression
    of such bitterness, such a profound melancholy, appeared in
    his winking and his supercilious eye, that it would have startled and
    frightened a man to look at him. But there was nobody in that
    deepening twilight to see him. He sat there alone.</p>

    <div class='poetry-container' style=''><div class='lgp'> <!-- rend=';' -->
    <p class='line0'>At the local cemetery they are</p>
    <p class='line0'>Very very busy with a brand new grave .&nbsp;.</p>
    </div></div> <!-- end poetry block --><!-- end rend -->

    <p class='noindent'>He went on humming. ‘If I were to fall sick,’ he was thinking,
    ‘who would look after me? Suppose one were to have a stroke.
    Hemorrhage on the brain; partial paralysis; mumbling speech;
    the tongue couldn’t utter what the brain thought; one was fed like
    a baby; clysters; such a bright doctor, rubbing his hands and
    smelling of disinfectant and eau-de-Cologne; saw nobody but the
    nurse; no friends; or once a week, perhaps, for an hour, out of
    charity; ‘Poor old Cardan, done for, I’m afraid; must send the
    old chap a fiver—hasn’t a penny, you know; get up a subscription;
    what a bore; astonishing that he can last so long.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.’</p>

    <div class='poetry-container' style=''><div class='lgp'> <!-- rend=';' -->
    <p class='line0'>He’ll keep warm next winter.</p>
    </div></div> <!-- end poetry block --><!-- end rend -->

    <p class='noindent'>The tune ended on a kind of trumpet call, rising from the dominant
    to the tonic—one dominant, three repeated tonics, drop down again
    to the dominant and then on the final syllable of ‘winter’ the last
    tonic. Finis, and no <span class='it'>da capo</span>, no second movement.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Mr. Cardan took another swig from his bottle; it was nearly
    empty now.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Perhaps one ought to have married. Kitty, for example. She
    would be old now and fat; or old and thin, like a skeleton very
    imperfectly disguised. Still, he had been very much in love with
    Kitty. Perhaps it would have been a good thing if he had married
    her. Pooh! with a burst of mocking laughter Mr. Cardan laughed
    aloud savagely. Marry indeed! She looked very coy, no doubt;
    but you bet, she was a little tart underneath, and lascivious as you
    make them. He remembered her with hatred and contempt. Portentous
    obscenities reverberated through the chambers of his mind.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>He thought of arthritis, he thought of gout, of cataract, of deafness.
    .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. And in any case, how many years were left him? Ten,
    fifteen, twenty if he were exceptional. And what years, what years!</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Mr. Cardan emptied the bottle and replacing the cork threw it
    into the black water beneath him. The wine had done nothing to
    improve his mood. He wished to God he were back at the palace,
    with people round him to talk to. Alone, he was without defence.
    He tried to think of something lively and amusing; indoor sports,
    for example. But instead of indoor sports he found himself contemplating
    visions of disease, decrepitude, death. And it was the
    same when he tried to think of reasonable, serious things: what is
    art, for example? and what was the survival value to a species of
    eyes or wings or protective colouring in their rudimentary state,
    before they were developed far enough to see, fly or protect? Why
    should the individuals having the first and still quite useless variation
    in the direction of something useful have survived more effectively
    than those who were handicapped by no eccentricity? Absorbing
    themes. But Mr. Cardan couldn’t keep his attention fixed on them.
    General paralysis of the insane, he reflected, was luckily an ailment
    for which he had not qualified in the past; luckily! miraculously,
    even! But stone, but neuritis, but fatty degeneration, but
    diabetes.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Lord, how he wished he had somebody to talk to!</p>

    <p class='pindent'>And all at once, as though in immediate answer to his prayer, he
    heard the sound of voices approaching through the now complete darkness.
    ‘Thank the Lord!’ said Mr. Cardan, and scrambling to his
    feet he walked in the direction from which the voices came. Two
    black silhouettes, one tall and masculine, the other, very small, belonging
    to a woman, loomed up out of the dark. Mr. Cardan removed the
    cigar from his mouth, took off his hat and bowed in their direction.</p>

    <div class='poetry-container' style=''><div class='lgp'> <!-- rend=';' -->
    <p class='line0'>‘<span class='it'>Nel mezzo del cammin di nostra vita,</span>’ he began,</p>
    <p class='line0'>‘<span class='it'>mi ritrovai per una selva oscura,</span></p>
    <p class='line0'>&ensp;<span class='it'>che la diritta via era smarrita.</span>’</p>
    </div></div> <!-- end poetry block --><!-- end rend -->

    <p class='pindent'>How lucky that Dante should also have lost his way, six hundred
    and twenty-four years ago! ‘In a word,’ Mr. Cardan went on,
    ‘<span class='it'>ho perso la mia strada</span>—though I have my doubts whether that’s
    very idiomatic. <span class='it'>Forse potrebbero darmi qualche indicazione.</span>’ In
    the presence of the strangers and at the sound of his own voice
    conversing, all Mr. Cardan’s depression had vanished. He was
    delighted by the fantastic turn he had managed to give the conversation
    at its inception. Perhaps with a little ingenuity he would be
    able to find an excuse for treating them to a little Leopardi. It
    was so amusing to astonish the natives.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>The two silhouettes, meanwhile, had halted at a little distance.
    When Mr. Cardan had finished his macaronic self-introduction,
    the taller of them answered in a harsh and, for a man’s, a shrill
    voice: ‘There’s no need to talk Italian. We’re English.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I’m enchanted to hear it,’ Mr. Cardan protested. And he
    explained at length and in his mother tongue what had happened
    to him. It occurred to him, at the same time, that this was a very
    odd place to find a couple of English tourists.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>The harsh voice spoke again. ‘There’s a path to Massarosa
    through the fields,’ it said. ‘And there’s another, in the opposite
    direction, that joins the Viareggio road. But they’re not very
    easy to find in the dark, and there are a lot of ditches.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘One can but perish in the attempt,’ said Mr. Cardan gallantly.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>This time it was the woman who spoke. ‘I think it would be
    better,’ she said, ‘if you slept at our house for the night. You’ll
    never find the way. I almost tumbled into the ditch myself just
    now.’ She laughed shrilly and more loudly, Mr. Cardan thought,
    at greater length, than was necessary.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘But have we room?’ asked the man in a tone which showed
    that he was very reluctant to receive a guest.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘But you know we’ve got room,’ the feminine voice answered
    in a tone of child-like astonishment. ‘It’s rough, though.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘That doesn’t matter in the least,’ Mr. Cardan assured her.
    ‘I’m most grateful to you for your offer,’ he added, making haste
    to accept the invitation before the man could take it back. He
    had no desire to go wandering at night among these ditches.
    Moreover, the prospect of having company, and odd company,
    he guessed, was alluring. ‘Most grateful,’ he repeated.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Well, if you think there’s room,’ said the man grudgingly.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Of course there is,’ the feminine voice replied, and laughed
    again. ‘Isn’t it six spare rooms that we’ve got? or is it seven?
    Come with us, Mr.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Mr.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Cardan.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Mr. Cardan. We’re going straight home. Such fun,’
    she added, and repeated her excessive laughter.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Mr. Cardan accompanied them, talking as agreeably as he could
    all the time. The man listened in a gloomy silence. But his sister—Mr.
    Cardan had discovered that they were brother and sister
    and that their name was Elver—laughed heartily at the end of each
    of Mr. Cardan’s sentences, as though everything he said were a
    glorious joke; laughed extravagantly and then made some remark
    which showed that she could have had no idea what Mr. Cardan
    had meant. Mr. Cardan found himself making his conversation
    more and more elementary, until as they approached their destination
    it was frankly addressed to a child of ten.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Here we are at last,’ she said, as they emerged from the denser
    night of a little wood of poplar trees. In front of them rose the
    large square mass of a house, utterly black but for a single lighted
    window.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>To the door, when they knocked, came an old woman with a
    candle. By its light Mr. Cardan saw his hosts for the first time.
    That the man was tall and thin he had seen even without the light;
    he revealed himself now as a stooping, hollow-chested creature of
    about forty, with long spidery legs and arms and a narrow yellow
    face, long-nosed, not too powerfully chinned, and lit by small and
    furtive grey eyes that looked mostly on the ground and seemed
    afraid of encountering other eyes. Mr. Cardan fancied there was
    something faintly clerical about his appearance. The man might
    be a broken-down clergyman—broken-down and possibly, when one
    considered the furtive eyes, unfrocked as well. He was dressed
    in a black suit, well cut and not old, but baggy at the knees and
    bulgy about the pockets of the coat. The nails of his long bony
    hands were rather dirty and his dark brown hair was too long
    above the ears and at the back of his neck.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Miss Elver was nearly a foot shorter than her brother; but she
    looked as though Nature had originally intended to make her nearly
    as tall. For her head was too large for her body and her legs too
    short. One shoulder was higher than the other. In face she
    somewhat resembled her brother. One saw in it the same long
    nose, but better shaped, the same weakness of chin; compensated
    for, however, by an amiable, ever-smiling mouth and large hazel
    eyes, not at all furtive or mistrustful, but on the contrary exceedingly
    confiding in their glance, albeit blank and watery in their brightness
    and not more expressive than the eyes of a young child. Her
    age, Mr. Cardan surmised, was twenty-eight or thirty. She wore
    a queer little shapeless dress, like a sack with holes in it for the head
    and arms to go through, made of some white material with a large
    design, that looked like an inferior version of the willow pattern,
    printed on it in bright red. Round her neck she wore two or three
    sets of gaudy beads. There were bangles on her wrists, and she
    carried a little reticule made of woven gold chains.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Using gesture to supplement his scanty vocabulary, Mr. Elver
    gave instructions to the old woman. She left him the candle and
    went out. Holding the light high, he led the way from the hall
    into a large room. They sat down on hard uncomfortable chairs
    round the empty hearth.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Such an uncomfy house!’ said Miss Elver. ‘You know I
    don’t like Italy much.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Dear, dear,’ said Mr. Cardan. ‘That’s bad. Don’t you
    even like Venice? All the boats and gondolas?’ And meeting
    those blank infantile eyes, he felt that he might almost go on about
    there being no gee-gees. The cat is on the mat; the pig in the
    gig is a big pig; the lass on the ass a crass lass. And so on.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Venice?’ said Miss Elver. ‘I’ve not been there.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Florence, then. Don’t you like Florence?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Nor there, either.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Rome? Naples?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Miss Elver shook her head.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘We’ve only been here,’ she said. ‘All the time.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Her brother, who had been sitting, bent forward, his elbows on
    his knees, his hands clasped in front of him, looking down at the
    floor, broke silence. ‘The fact is,’ he said in his harsh high voice,
    ‘my sister has to keep quiet; she’s doing a rest cure.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Here?’ asked Mr. Cardan. ‘Doesn’t she find it a bit hot?
    Rather relaxing?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Yes, it’s awfully hot, isn’t it?’ said Miss Elver. ‘I’m always
    telling Philip that.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I should have thought you’d have been better at the sea, or
    in the mountains,’ said Mr. Cardan.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Mr. Elver shook his head. ‘The doctors,’ he said mysteriously,
    and did not go on.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘And the risk of malaria?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘That’s all rot,’ said Mr. Elver, with so much violence, such
    indignation, that Mr. Cardan could only imagine that he was a
    landed proprietor in these parts and meant to develop his estate
    as a health resort.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Oh, of course it’s mostly been got rid of,’ he said mollifyingly.
    ‘The Maremma isn’t what it was.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Mr. Elver said nothing, but scowled at the floor.</p>

    <h2>CHAPTER VII</h2>

    <p class='pindent'>The dining-room was also large and bare. Four candles
    burned on the long narrow table; their golden brightness faded
    in the remoter corners to faint twilight; the shadows were huge
    and black. Entering, Mr. Cardan could fancy himself Don Juan
    walking down to supper in the Commander’s vault.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Supper was at once dismal and exceedingly lively. While his
    sister chattered and laughed unceasingly with her guest, Mr. Elver
    preserved throughout the meal an unbroken silence. Gloomily
    he ate his way through the mixed and fragmentary meal which the
    old woman kept bringing in, relay after unexpected relay, on little
    dishes from the kitchen. Gloomily too, with the air of a weak
    man who drinks to give himself courage and the illusion of strength,
    he drank glass after glass of the strong red wine. He kept his eyes
    fixed most of the time on the table-cloth in front of his plate; but
    every now and then he would look up for a second to dart a glance
    at the other two—for a moment only, then, fearful of being caught
    in the act and looked at straight in the face, he turned away again.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Mr. Cardan enjoyed his supper. Not that the food was particularly
    good; it was not. The old woman was one of those inept
    practitioners of Italian cookery who disguise their short-comings
    under floods of tomato sauce, with a pinch of garlic thrown in to
    make the disguise impenetrable. No, what Mr. Cardan enjoyed
    was the company. It was a long time since he had sat down with
    such interesting specimens. One’s range, he reflected, is altogether
    too narrowly limited. One doesn’t know enough people; one’s
    acquaintanceship isn’t sufficiently diversified. Burglars, for example,
    millionaires, imbeciles, clergymen, Hottentots, sea captains—one’s
    personal knowledge of these most interesting human species
    is quite absurdly small. To-night, it seemed to him, he was
    doing something to widen his range.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I’m so glad we met you,’ Miss Elver was saying. ‘In the
    dark—such a start you gave me too!’ She shrieked with laughter.
    ‘We were getting so dull here. Weren’t we, Phil?’ She appealed
    to her brother; but Mr. Elver said nothing, did not even look up.
    ‘So dull. I’m awfully glad you were there.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Not so glad as I am, I assure you,’ said Mr. Cardan gallantly.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Miss Elver looked at him for a moment, coyly and confidentially;
    then putting up her hand to her face, as though she were screening
    herself from Mr. Cardan’s gaze, she turned away, tittering. Her
    face became quite red. She peeped at him between her fingers
    and tittered again.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>It occurred to Mr. Cardan that he’d be in for a breach of promise
    case very soon if he weren’t careful. Tactfully he changed the
    subject; asked her what sort of food she liked best and learned that
    her favourites were strawberries, cream ice and mixed chocolates.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>The dessert had been eaten. Mr. Elver suddenly looked up
    and said: ‘Grace, I think you ought to go to bed.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Miss Elver’s face, from having been bright with laughter,
    became at once quite overcast. A film of tears floated up into her
    eyes, making them seem more lustrous; she looked at her brother
    appealingly. ‘Must I go?’ she said. ‘Just this once!’ She
    tried to coax him. ‘This once!’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>But Mr. Elver was not to be moved. ‘No, no,’ he said sternly.
    ‘You must go.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>His sister sighed and made a little whimpering sound. But she
    got up, all the same, and walked obediently towards the door.
    She was almost on the threshold, when she halted, turned and ran
    back to say good-night to Mr. Cardan. ‘I’m so glad,’ she said,
    ‘that we found you. Such fun. Good-night. But you mustn’t
    look at me like that.’ She put up her hand again to her face. ‘Oh,
    not like that.’ And still giggling, she ran out of the room.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>There was a long silence.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Have some wine,’ said Mr. Elver at last, and pushed the flask
    in Mr. Cardan’s direction.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Mr. Cardan replenished his glass and then, politely, did the
    same for his host. Wine—it was the only thing that was likely to
    make this dismal devil talk. With his practised and professional
    eye, Mr. Cardan thought he could detect in his host’s expression
    certain hardly perceptible symptoms of incipient tipsiness. A
    spidery creature like that, thought Mr. Cardan contemptuously,
    couldn’t be expected to hold his liquor well; and he had been
    putting it down pretty steadily all through supper. A little more
    and, Mr. Cardan was confident, he’d be as clay in the hands of a
    sober interrogator (and Mr. Cardan could count on being sober
    for at least three bottles longer than a poor feeble creature like this);
    he’d talk, he’d talk; the only difficulty would be to get him to
    stop talking.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Thanks,’ said Mr. Elver, and gloomily gulped down the
    replenished glass.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>That’s the style, thought Mr. Cardan; and in his liveliest
    manner he began to tell the story of the grocer’s brother’s statue
    and of his pursuit of it, ending up with an account, already more
    florid than the previous version, of how he lost himself.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I console myself superstitiously,’ he concluded, ‘by the reflection
    that fate wouldn’t have put me to these little troubles and
    inconveniences if it weren’t intending to do something handsome
    by me in the end. I’m paying in advance; but I trust I’m paying
    for something round and tidy. All the same, what a curse this
    hunt for money is!’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Mr. Elver nodded. ‘It’s the root of all evil,’ he said, and
    emptied his glass. Unobtrusively Mr. Cardan replenished it.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Quite right,’ he confirmed. ‘And it’s twice cursed, if you’ll
    allow me to play Portia for a moment: it curses him that hath—can
    you think of a single really rich person of your acquaintance
    who wouldn’t be less avaricious, less tyrannous, self-indulgent and
    generally porkish if he didn’t pay super-tax? And it also curses
    him that hath not, making him do all manner of absurd, humiliating,
    discreditable things which he’d never think of doing if the hedgerows
    grew breadfruit and bananas and grapes enough to keep one
    in free food and liquor.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘It curses him that hath not the most,’ said Mr. Elver with a
    sudden savage animation. This was a subject, evidently, on which
    he felt deeply. He looked sharply at Mr. Cardan for a moment,
    then turned away to dip his long nose once more in his tumbler.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Perhaps,’ said Mr. Cardan judicially. ‘At any rate there are
    more complaints about this curse than about the other. Those
    that have not complain about their own fate. Those that have do
    not, it is only those in contact with them—and since the havers are
    few these too are few—who complain of the curse of having. In
    my time I have belonged to both categories. Once I had; and I
    can see that to my fellow men I must then have been intolerable.
    Now’—Mr. Cardan drew a deep breath and blew it out between
    trumpeting lips, to indicate the way in which the money had gone—‘now
    I have not. The curse of insolence and avarice has been
    removed from me. But what low shifts, what abjections this not-having
    has, by compensation, reduced me to! Swindling peasants
    out of their artistic property, for example!’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Ah, but that’s not so bad,’ cried Mr. Elver excitedly, ‘as
    what I’ve had to do. That’s nothing at all. You’ve never been
    an advertisement canvasser.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘No,’ Mr. Cardan admitted, ‘I’ve never been an advertisement
    canvasser.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Then you can’t know what the curse of not-having really is.
    You can’t have an idea. You’ve no right to talk about the curse.’
    Mr. Elver’s harsh, unsteady voice rose and fell excitedly as he talked.
    ‘No right,’ he repeated.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Perhaps I haven’t,’ said Mr. Cardan mollifyingly. He took
    the opportunity to pour out some more wine for his host. Nobody
    has a right, he reflected, to be more miserable than we are. Each
    one of us is the most unhappily circumstanced creature in the world.
    Hence it’s enormously to our credit that we bear up and get on as
    well as we do.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Look here,’ Mr. Elver went on confidentially, and he tried to
    look Mr. Cardan squarely in the face as he spoke; but the effort
    was too great and he had to avert his eyes; ‘look here, let me tell
    you.’ He leaned forward eagerly and slapped the table in front of
    where Mr. Cardan was sitting to emphasize what he was saying
    and to call his guest’s attention to it. ‘My father was a country
    parson,’ he began, talking rapidly and excitedly. ‘We were very
    poor—horribly. Not that he minded much: he used to read
    Dante all the time. That annoyed my mother—I don’t know
    why. You know the smell of very plain cooking? Steamed
    puddings—the very thought of them makes me sick now.’ He
    shuddered. ‘There were four of us then. But my brother was
    killed in the war and my elder sister died of influenza. So now
    there’s only me and the one you saw to-night.’ He tapped his
    forehead. ‘She never grew up, but got stuck somehow. A
    moron.’ He laughed compassionlessly. ‘Though I don’t know
    why I need tell you that. For it’s obvious enough, isn’t it?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Mr. Cardan said nothing. His host flinched away from his
    half-winking, half-supercilious gaze, and fortifying himself with
    another gulp of wine, which Mr. Cardan a moment later unobtrusively
    made good from the flask, went on:</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Four of us,’ he repeated. ‘You can imagine it wasn’t easy for
    my father. And my mother died when we were still children.
    Still, he managed to send us to a rather shabby specimen of the right
    sort of school, and we’d have gone on to the university if we could
    have got scholarships. But we didn’t.’ At this Mr. Elver, on
    whom the wine seemed quite suddenly to be making its effect,
    laughed loudly, as though he had made a very good joke. ‘So
    my brother went into an engineering firm, and it was just being
    arranged, at goodness knows what sort of a sacrifice, that I should
    be turned into a solicitor, when pop! my father falls down dead
    with heart failure. Well, he was all right rambling about the
    <span class='it'>Paradiso</span>. But I had to scramble into the nearest job available.
    That was how I came to be an advertisement canvasser. Oh
    Lord!’ He put his hand over his eyes, as though to shut out
    some disgusting vision. ‘Talk of the curse of not-having! For
    a monthly magazine it was—the sort of one with masses of little
    ads for indigestion cures; and electric belts to make you strong;
    and art by correspondence; and Why Wear a Truss? and superfluous
    hair-killers; and pills to enlarge the female figure; and
    labour-saving washing machines on the instalment system; and
    Learn to Play the Piano without Practising; and thirty-six reproductions
    of nudes from the Paris Salon for five bob; and drink
    cures in plain wrapper, strictly confidential, and all the rest. There
    were hundreds and hundreds of small advertisers. I used to spend
    all my days running round to shops and offices, cajoling old advertisers
    to renew or fishing for new ones. And, God! how horrible
    it was! Worming one’s way in to see people who didn’t want to
    see one and to whom one was only a nuisance, a sort of tiresome
    beggar on the hunt for money. How polite one had to be to
    insolent underlings, strong in their office and only too delighted
    to have an opportunity to play the bully in their turn! And then
    there was that terrible cheerful, frank, manly manner one had to
    keep up all the time. The “I put it to you, sir,” straight from the
    shoulder business; the persuasive honesty, the earnestness and
    the frightful pretence one had to keep up so strenuously and continuously
    that one believed in what one was talking about, thought
    the old magazine a splendid proposition and regarded the inventor
    of advertisements as the greatest benefactor the human race has
    ever known. And what a presence one had to have! I could
    never achieve a presence, somehow. I could never even look neat.
    And you had to try and impress the devils as a keen, competent
    salesman. God, it was awful! And the way some of them would
    treat you. As the damnedest bore in the world—that was the best
    you could hope. But sometimes they treated you as a robber and
    a swindler. It was your fault if an insufficient number of imbeciles
    hadn’t bought galvanic belly bands or learned to play like Busoni
    without practising. It was your fault; and they’d fly in a rage
    and curse at you, and you had to be courteous and cheery and
    tactful and always enthusiastic in the face of it. Good Lord, is
    there anything more horrible than having to face an angry man?
    I don’t know why, but it’s somehow so profoundly humiliating
    to take part in a squabble, even when one’s the aggressor. One
    feels afterwards that one’s no better than a dog. But when one’s
    the victim of somebody else’s anger—that’s awful. That’s
    simply awful,’ he repeated, and brought his hand with a clap on to
    the table to emphasize his words. ‘I’m not built for that sort of
    thing. I’m not a bully or a fighter. They used to make me almost
    ill, those scenes. I couldn’t sleep, thinking of them—remembering
    those that were past and looking forward with terror to the ones
    that were coming. People talk about Dostoievsky’s feelings when
    he was marched out into the barrack square, tied to a post with the
    firing party lined up in front of him, and then, at the very last second,
    when his eyes were already bandaged, reprieved. But I tell you
    I used to go through his experiences half a dozen times a day,
    nerving myself to face some inevitable interview, the very thought
    of which made me sick with apprehension. And for me there was
    no reprieve. The execution was gone through with, to the very
    end. Good Lord, how often I’ve hesitated at the door of some
    old bully’s office, all in a bloody sweat, hesitating to cross the
    threshold. How often I’ve turned back at the last moment and
    turned into a pub for a nip of brandy to steady my nerves, or gone
    to a chemist for a pick-me-up! You can’t imagine what I suffered
    then!’ He emptied his glass, as though to drown the rising horror.
    ‘Nobody can imagine,’ he repeated, and his voice quivered with
    the anguish of his self-pity. ‘And then how little one got in return!
    One suffered daily torture for the privilege of being hardly able to
    live. And all the things one might have done, if one had had
    capital! To know for an absolute certainty that—given ten
    thousand—one could turn them into a hundred thousand in two
    years; to have the whole plan worked out down to its smallest
    details, to have thought out exactly how one would live when one
    was rich, and meanwhile to go on living in poverty and squalor
    and slavery—that’s the curse of not-having. That’s what <span class='it'>I</span>
    suffered.’ Overcome by wine and emotion, Mr. Elver burst into
    tears.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Mr. Cardan patted him on the shoulder. He was too tactful to
    offer the philosophical consolation that such suffering is the lot
    of nine-tenths of the human race. Mr. Elver, he could see, would
    never have forgiven such a denial of his dolorous uniqueness. ‘You
    must have courage,’ said Mr. Cardan, and pressing the glass into
    Mr. Elver’s hand he added: ‘Drink some of this. It’ll do you
    good.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Mr. Elver drank and wiped his eyes. ‘But I’ll make them
    smart for it one day,’ he said, banging the table with his fist. The
    violent self-pity of a moment ago transformed itself into an equally
    violent anger. ‘I’ll make them all pay for what I suffered.
    When I’m rich.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘That’s the spirit,’ said Mr. Cardan encouragingly.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Thirteen years of it I had,’ Mr. Elver went on. ‘And two
    and a half years during the war, dressed in uniform and filling up
    forms in a wooden hut at Leeds; but that was better than touting
    for advertisements. Thirteen years. Penal servitude with torture.
    But I’ll pay them, I’ll pay them.’ He banged the table again.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Still,’ said Mr. Cardan, ‘you seem to have got out of it now
    all right. Living here in Italy is a sign of freedom; at least I
    hope so.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>At these words Mr. Elver’s anger against ‘them’ suddenly
    dropped. His face took on a mysterious and knowing expression.
    He smiled to himself what was meant to be a dark, secret and
    satanic smile, a smile that should be all but imperceptible to the
    acutest eye. But he found, in his tipsiness, that the smile was
    growing uncontrollably broader and broader; he wanted to grin,
    to laugh aloud. Not that what he was secretly thinking about was
    at all funny; it was not, at any rate when he was sober. But now
    the whole world seemed to swim in a bubbly sea of hilarity. Moreover,
    the muscles of his face, when he started to smile satanically,
    had all at once got out of hand and were insisting on expanding
    what should have been the expression of Lucifer’s darkest and most
    fearful thoughts into a bumpkin’s grin. Hastily Mr. Elver extinguished
    his face in his glass, in the hope of concealing from his
    guest that rebellious smile. He emerged again choking. Mr.
    Cardan had to pat him on the back. When it was all over,
    Mr. Elver reassumed his mysterious expression and nodded
    significantly. ‘Perhaps,’ he said darkly, not so much in response
    to anything Mr. Cardan had said as on general principles, so to
    speak, and to indicate that the whole situation was in the last
    degree dubious, dark and contingent—contingent on a whole
    chain of further contingencies.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Mr. Cardan’s curiosity was roused by the spectacle of this queer
    pantomime; he refilled his host’s glass. ‘Still,’ he insisted, ‘if
    you hadn’t freed yourself, how would you be staying here—’ in
    this horrible marsh, he had almost added; but he checked himself
    and said ‘in Italy’ instead.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>The other shook his head. ‘I can’t tell you,’ he said darkly,
    and again the satanic smile threatened to enlarge itself to imbecility.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Mr. Cardan relapsed into silence, content to wait. From the
    expression on Mr. Elver’s face he could see that the effort of keeping
    a secret would be, for his host, intolerably great. The fruit must
    be left to ripen of itself. He said nothing and looked pensively
    into one of the dark corners of the tomb-like chamber as though
    occupied with his own thoughts.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Mr. Elver sat hunched up in his chair, frowning at the table in
    front of him. Every now and then he took a sip of wine. Tipsily
    mutable, his mood changed all at once from hilarious to profoundly
    gloomy. The silence, the darkness funereally tempered by the
    four unwavering candles, worked on his mind. What a moment
    since had seemed an uproarious joke now presented itself to his
    thoughts as appalling. He felt a great need to unburden himself,
    to transfer responsibilities on to other shoulders, to get advice that
    should confirm him in his course. Furtively, for a glimpse only,
    he looked at his guest. How abstractedly and regardlessly he was
    staring into vacancy! Not a thought, no sympathy for poor
    Philip Elver. Ah, if he only knew.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>He broke silence at last. ‘Tell me,’ he said abruptly, and it
    seemed to his drunken mind that he was displaying an incredible
    subtlety in his method of approaching the subject; ‘do you believe
    in vivisection?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Mr. Cardan was surprised by the question. ‘Believe in it?’
    he echoed. ‘I don’t quite know how one can <span class='it'>believe</span> in vivisection.
    I think it useful, if that’s what you mean.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘You don’t think it’s wrong?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘No,’ said Mr. Cardan.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘You think it doesn’t matter cutting up animals?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Not if the cutting serves some useful human purpose.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘You don’t think animals have got rights?’ pursued Mr. Elver
    with a clarity and tenacity that, in a drunken man, surprised Mr.
    Cardan. This was a subject, it was clear, on which Mr. Elver
    must long have meditated. ‘Just like human beings?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘No,’ said Mr. Cardan. ‘I’m not one of those fools who think
    that one life is as good as another, simply because it <span class='it'>is</span> a life; that
    a grasshopper is as good as a dog and a dog as good as a man. You
    must recognize a hierarchy of existences.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘A hierarchy,’ exclaimed Mr. Elver, delighted with the word,
    ‘a hierarchy—that’s it. That’s exactly it. A hierarchy. And
    among human beings too?’ he added.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Yes, of course,’ Mr. Cardan affirmed. ‘The life of the soldier
    who killed Archimedes isn’t worth the life of Archimedes. It’s
    the fundamental fallacy of democracy and humanitarian Christianity
    to suppose that it is. Though of course,’ Mr. Cardan added
    pensively, ‘one has no justifying reason for saying so, but only one’s
    instinctive taste. For the soldier, after all, may have been a good
    husband and father, may have spent the non-professional, unsoldierly
    portions of his life in turning the left cheek and making two blades
    of grass grow where only one grew before. If, like Tolstoy, your
    tastes run to good fatherhood, left cheeks and agriculture, then
    you’ll say that the life of the soldier is worth just as much as the
    life of Archimedes—much more, indeed; for Archimedes was a
    mere geometrician, who occupied himself with lines and angles,
    curves and surfaces, instead of with good and evil, husbandry and
    religion. But if, on the contrary, one’s tastes are of a more intellectual
    cast, then one will think as I think—that the life of
    Archimedes is worth the lives of several billion of even the most
    amiable soldiers. But as for saying which point of view is right—’
    Mr. Cardan shrugged his shoulders. ‘Partner, I leave it to you.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Mr. Elver seemed rather disappointed by the inconclusive turn
    that his guest’s discourse had taken. ‘But still,’ he insisted,
    ‘it’s obvious that a wise man’s better than a fool. There <span class='it'>is</span> a
    hierarchy.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Well, I personally should say there was,’ said Mr. Cardan.
    ‘But I can’t speak for others.’ He saw that he had been carried
    away by the pleasures of speculation into saying things his host did
    not want to hear. To almost all men, even when they are sober,
    a suspense of judgment is extraordinarily distasteful. And Mr.
    Elver was far from sober; moreover, Mr. Cardan began to suspect,
    this philosophic conversation was a tortuous introduction to personal
    confidences. If one wanted the confidences one must agree with
    the would-be confider’s opinion. That was obvious.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Good,’ said Mr. Elver. ‘Then you’ll admit that an intelligent
    man is worth more than an imbecile, a moron; ha ha, a moron.
    .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.’ And at this word he burst into violent and savage laughter,
    which, becoming more and more extravagant as it prolonged itself,
    turned at last into an uncontrollable screaming and sobbing.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>His chair turned sideways to the table, his legs crossed, the
    fingers of one hand playing caressingly with his wine glass, the
    other manipulating his cigar, Mr. Cardan looked on, while his
    host, the tears streaming down his cheeks, his narrow face distorted
    almost out of recognition, laughed and sobbed, now throwing
    himself back in his chair, now covering his face with his hands,
    now bending forward over the table to rest his forehead on his arms,
    while his whole body shook and shook with the repeated and
    uncontrollable spasms. A disgusting sight, thought Mr. Cardan;
    and a disgusting specimen too. He began to have an inkling of
    what the fellow was up to. Translate ‘intelligent man’ and
    ‘moron’ into ‘me’ and ‘my sister’—for the general, the philosophical
    in any man’s conversation must always be converted into
    the particular and personal if you want to understand him—interpret
    in personal terms what he had said about vivisection, animal
    rights and the human hierarchy, and there appeared, as the plain
    transliteration of the cipher—what? Something that looked
    exceedingly villainous, thought Mr. Cardan.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Then I suppose,’ he said in a very cool and level voice, when
    the other had begun to recover from his fit, ‘I suppose it’s your
    sister who has the liberating cash.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Mr. Elver glanced at him, with an expression of surprise, almost
    of alarm, on his face. His eyes wavered away from Mr. Cardan’s
    steady, genial gaze. He took refuge in his tumbler. ‘Yes,’ he
    said, when he had taken a gulp. ‘How did you guess?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Mr. Cardan shrugged his shoulders. ‘Purely at random,’
    he said.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘After my father died,’ Mr. Elver explained, ‘she went to live
    with her godmother, who was the old lady at the big house in our
    parish. A nasty old woman she was. But she took to Grace, she
    kind of adopted her. When the old bird died at the beginning of
    this year, Grace found she’d been left twenty-five thousand.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>For all comment, Mr. Cardan clicked his tongue against his
    palate and slightly raised his eyebrows.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Twenty-five thousand,’ the other repeated. ‘A half-wit, a
    moron! What can she do with it?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘She can take you to Italy,’ Mr. Cardan suggested.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Oh, of course we can live on the interest all right,’ said Mr.
    Elver contemptuously. ‘But when I think how I could multiply
    it.’ He leaned forward eagerly, looking into Mr. Cardan’s face
    for a second, then the shifty grey eyes moved away and fixed themselves
    on one of the buttons of Mr. Cardan’s coat, from which they
    would occasionally dart upwards again to reconnoitre and return.
    ‘I’ve worked it out, you see,’ he began, talking so quickly that
    the words tumbled over one another and became almost incoherent.
    ‘The Trade Cycle.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. I can prophesy exactly what’ll happen
    at any given moment. For instance .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.’ He rambled on in a
    series of complicated explanations.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Well, if you’re as certain as all that,’ said Mr. Cardan when
    he had finished, ‘why don’t you get your sister to lend you the
    money?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Why not?’ Mr. Elver repeated gloomily and leaned back
    again in his chair. ‘Because that blasted old hag had the capital
    tied up. It can’t be touched.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Perhaps she lacked faith in the Trade Cycle,’ Mr. Cardan
    suggested.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘God rot her!’ said the other fervently. ‘And when I think
    of what I’d do with the money when I’d made really a lot.
    Science, art .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Not to mention revenge on your old acquaintances,’ said
    Mr. Cardan, cutting him short. ‘You’ve worked out the whole
    programme?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Everything,’ said Mr. Elver. ‘There’d never have been
    anything like it. And now this damned fool of an old woman
    goes and gives the money to her pet moron and makes it impossible
    for me to touch it.’ He ground his teeth with rage and disgust.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘But if your sister were to die unmarried,’ said Mr. Cardan,
    ‘the money, I suppose, would be yours.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>The other nodded.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘It’s a very hierarchical question, certainly,’ said Mr. Cardan.
    In the vault-like room there was a prolonged silence.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Mr. Elver had reached the final stage of intoxication. Almost
    suddenly he began to feel weak, profoundly weary and rather ill.
    Anger, hilarity, the sense of satanic power—all had left him. He
    desired only to go to bed as soon as possible; at the same time he
    doubted his capacity to get there. He shut his eyes.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Mr. Cardan looked at the limp and sodden figure with an expert’s
    eye, scientifically observing it. It was clear to him that the
    creature would volunteer no more; that it had come to a state
    when it could hardly think of anything but the gradually mounting
    nausea within it. It was time to change tactics. He leaned
    forward, and tapping his host’s arm launched a direct attack.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘So you brought the poor girl here to get rid of her,’ he said.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Mr. Elver opened his eyes and flashed at his tormentor a hunted
    and terrified look. His face became very pale. He turned away.
    ‘No, no, not that.’ His voice had sunk to an unsteady whisper.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Not that?’ Mr. Cardan echoed scornfully. ‘But it’s obvious.
    And you’ve as good as been telling me so for the last half-hour.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Mr. Elver could only go on whispering: ‘No.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Mr. Cardan ignored the denial. ‘How did you propose to do
    it?’ he asked. ‘It’s always risky, whatever way you choose, and
    I shouldn’t put you down as being particularly courageous. How,
    how?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>The other shook his head.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Mr. Cardan insisted, ruthlessly. ‘Ratsbane?’ he queried.
    ‘Steel?—no, you wouldn’t have the guts for that. Or did you
    mean that she should tumble by accident into one of those convenient
    ditches?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘No, no. No.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘But I insist on being told,’ said Mr. Cardan truculently, and
    he thumped the table till the reflections of the candles in the
    brimming glasses quivered and rocked.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Mr. Elver put his face in his hands and burst into tears. ‘You’re
    a bully,’ he sobbed, ‘a dirty bully, like all the rest.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Come, come,’ Mr. Cardan protested encouragingly. ‘Don’t
    take it so hardly. I’m sorry I upset you. You mustn’t think,’
    he added, ‘that I have any of the vulgar prejudices about this affair.
    I’m not condemning you. Far from it. I don’t want to use your
    answers against you. I merely ask out of curiosity—pure curiosity.
    Cheer up, cheer up. Try a little more wine.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>But Mr. Elver was feeling too deplorably sick to be able to think
    of wine without horror. He refused it, shuddering. ‘I didn’t
    mean to do anything,’ he whispered. ‘I meant it just to happen.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Just to happen? Yours must be a very hopeful nature,’ said
    Mr. Cardan.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘It’s in Dante, you know. My father brought us up on Dante;
    I loathed the stuff,’ he added, as though it had been castor oil.
    ‘But things stuck in my mind. Do you remember the woman
    who tells how she died: “<span class='it'>Siena mi fe’, disfecemi Maremma</span>”?
    Her husband shut her up in a castle in the Maremma and she died
    of fever. Do you remember?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Mr. Cardan nodded.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘That was the idea. I had the quinine: I’ve been taking ten
    grains a day ever since I arrived—for safety’s sake. But there
    doesn’t seem to be any fever here nowadays,’ Mr. Elver added.
    ‘We’ve been here nine weeks.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘And nothing’s happened!’ Mr. Cardan leaned back in his
    chair and roared with laughter. ‘Well, the moral of that,’ he
    added, when he had breath enough to begin talking again, ‘the
    moral of that is: See that your authorities are up to date.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>But Mr. Elver was past seeing a joke. He got up from his chair
    and stood unsteadily, supporting himself with a hand on the table.
    ‘Would you mind helping me to my room?’ he faintly begged. ‘I
    don’t feel very well.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Mr. Cardan helped him first into the garden. ‘You ought to
    learn to carry your liquor more securely,’ he said, when the worst
    was over. ‘That’s another of the evening’s morals.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>When he had lighted his host to bed, Mr. Cardan went to his
    appointed room and undressed. It was a long time before he fell
    asleep. The mosquitoes, partly, and partly his own busy thoughts,
    were responsible for his wakefulness.</p>

    <h2>CHAPTER VIII</h2>

    <p class='pindent'>Next morning Mr. Cardan was down early. The first thing
    he saw in the desolate garden before the house was Miss Elver.
    She was dressed in a frock cut on the same sack-like lines as her last
    night’s dress, but made of a gaudy, large-patterned material that
    looked as though it had been designed for the upholstery of chairs
    and sofas, not of the human figure. Her beads were more numerous
    and more brilliant than before. She carried a parasol of brightly
    flowered silk.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Emerging from the house, Mr. Cardan found her in the act of
    tying a bunch of Michaelmas daisies to the tail of a large white
    maremman dog that stood, its mouth open, its pink tongue lolling
    out and its large brown eyes fixed, so it seemed, meditatively on the
    further horizon, waiting for Miss Elver to have finished the operation.
    But Miss Elver was very slow and clumsy. The fingers
    of her stubby little hands seemed to find the process of tying a bow
    in a piece of ribbon extraordinarily difficult. Once or twice the
    dog looked round with a mild curiosity to see what was happening
    at the far end of its anatomy. It did not seem in the least to resent
    the liberties Miss Elver was taking with its tail, but stood quite
    still, resigned and waiting. Mr. Cardan was reminded of that
    enormous tolerance displayed by dogs and cats of even the most
    fiendish children. Perhaps, in a flash of Bergsonian intuition, the
    beast had realized the childish essence of Miss Elver’s character,
    had recognized the infant under the disguise of the full-grown
    woman. Dogs are good Bergsonians, thought Mr. Cardan. Men,
    on the other hand, are better Kantians. He approached softly.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Miss Elver had at last succeeded in tying the bow to her satisfaction;
    the dog’s white tail was tipped with a rosette of purple
    flowers. She straightened herself up and looked admiringly at
    her handiwork. ‘There!’ she said at last, addressing herself to
    the dog. ‘Now you can run away. Now you look lovely.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>The dog took the hint and trotted off, waving his flower-tipped
    tail.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Mr. Cardan stepped forward. ‘ “Neat but not gaudy,” ’ he
    quoted, ‘ “genteel but not expensive, like the gardener’s dog with
    a primrose tied to his tail.” Good-morning.’ He took off his hat.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>But Miss Elver did not return his salutation. Taken by surprise,
    she had stood, as though petrified, staring at him with stretched
    eyes and open mouth while he spoke. At Mr. Cardan’s ‘good-morning,’
    which was the first word of his that she had understood,
    the enchantment of stillness seemed to be lifted from her. She
    burst into a nervous laugh, covered her blushing face with her hands—for
    a moment only—then turned and ran down the path, ungainly
    as an animal moving in an element not its own, to take refuge
    behind a clump of rank bushes at the end of the garden. Seeing
    her run, the big dog came bounding after her, joyously barking.
    One Michaelmas daisy dropped to the ground, then another. In
    a moment they were all gone and the ribbon with them.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Slowly, cautiously, as though he were stalking a shy bird, and
    with a reassuring air of being absorbed in anything rather than
    the pursuit of a runaway, Mr. Cardan walked after Miss Elver
    down the path. Between the leaves of the bushes he caught
    glimpses of her bright frock; sometimes, with infinite circumspection,
    and certain, it was clear, that she was escaping all notice,
    she peeped at Mr. Cardan round the edge of the bush. Gambolling
    round her, the dog continued to bark.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Arrived within five or six yards of Miss Elver’s hiding-place,
    Mr. Cardan halted. ‘Come now,’ he said cajolingly, ‘what’s
    there so frightening about me? Take a good look at me. I don’t
    bite. I’m quite tame.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>The leaves of the bushes shook; from behind them came a peal
    of shrill laughter.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I don’t even bark, like your stupid dog,’ Mr. Cardan went on.
    ‘And if you tied a bunch of flowers on to my tail I should never
    have the bad manners to get rid of them in the first two minutes
    like that rude animal.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>There was more laughter.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Won’t you come out?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>There was no answer.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Oh, very well then,’ said Mr. Cardan, in the tone of one who
    is deeply offended, ‘I shall go away. Good-bye.’ He retraced
    his steps for a few yards, then turned off to the right along a little
    path that led to the garden gate. When he was about three-quarters
    of the way along it, he heard the sound of hurrying footsteps
    coming up behind him. He walked on, pretending to notice
    nothing. There was a touch on his arm.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Don’t go. Please.’ Miss Elver’s voice spoke imploringly.
    He looked round, as though startled. ‘I won’t run away again.
    But you mustn’t look at me like that.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Like what?’ asked Mr. Cardan.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Miss Elver put up a screening hand and turned away. ‘Like I
    don’t know what,’ she said.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Mr. Cardan thought he perfectly understood; he pursued the
    subject no further. ‘Well, if you promise not to run away,’ he
    said, ‘I won’t go.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Miss Elver’s face shone with pleasure and gratitude. ‘Thank
    you,’ she said. ‘Should we go and look at the chickens? They’re
    round at the back.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>They went round to the back. Mr. Cardan admired the
    chickens. ‘You like animals?’ he asked.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I should think so,’ said Miss Elver rapturously, and nodded.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Have you ever had a parrot of your own?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘No.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Or a monkey?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>She shook her head.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Not even a Shetland pony?’ asked Mr. Cardan on a note of
    astonishment.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Miss Elver’s voice trembled as she again had to answer ‘No.’
    At the thought of all these enchanting things she had never
    possessed, the tears came into her eyes.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘In my house,’ said Mr. Cardan, conjuring up fairy palaces as
    easily as Aladdin, ‘there are hundreds of them. I’ll give you
    some when you come to stay with me.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Miss Elver’s face became bright again. ‘Will you?’ she said,
    ‘Oh, that would be nice, that would be nice. And do you keep
    bears?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘One or two,’ said Mr. Cardan modestly.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Well .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.’ Miss Elver looked up at him, her blank bright
    eyes opened to their fullest extent. She paused, drew a deep
    breath and let it slowly out again. ‘It must be a nice house,’ she
    added at last, turning away and nodding slowly at every word, ‘a
    nice house. That’s all I can say.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘You’d like to come and stay?’ asked Mr. Cardan.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I should think I would,’ Miss Elver replied decidedly, looking
    up at him again. Then suddenly she blushed, she put up her
    hands. ‘No, no, no,’ she protested.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Why not?’ asked Mr. Cardan.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>She shook her head. ‘I don’t know.’ And she began to laugh.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Remember the bears,’ said Mr. Cardan.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Yes. But .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.’ She left the sentence unfinished. The old
    woman came to the back door and rang the bell for breakfast.
    Ungainly as a diving-bird on land, Miss Elver scuttled into the
    house. Her companion followed more slowly. In the dining-room,
    less tomb-like in the bright morning light, breakfast was
    waiting. Mr. Cardan found his hostess already eating with passion,
    as though her life depended on it.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I’m so hungry,’ she explained with her mouth full. ‘Phil’s
    late,’ she added.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Well, I’m not surprised,’ said Mr. Cardan, as he sat down and
    unfolded his napkin.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>When he came down at last, it was in the guise of a cleric so
    obviously unfrocked, so deplorably seedy and broken-down that
    Mr. Cardan felt almost sorry for him.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Nothing like good strong coffee,’ he said cheerfully, as he
    filled his host’s cup. Mr. Elver looked on, feeling too melancholy
    and too ill to speak. For a long time he sat motionless in his chair,
    without moving, lacking the strength to stretch out his hand
    to his cup.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Why don’t you eat, Phil?’ asked his sister, as she decapitated
    her second egg. ‘You generally eat such a lot.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Goaded, as though by a taunt, Philip Elver reached for his
    coffee and swallowed down a gulp. He even took some toast and
    buttered it; but he could not bring himself to eat.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>At half-past ten Mr. Cardan left the house. He told his host
    that he was going in search of his sculpture; and he comforted
    Miss Elver, who, seeing him put on his hat and take his walking
    stick, had begun to whimper, by assuring her that he would be back
    to luncheon. Following the old woman’s directions, Mr. Cardan
    soon found himself on the shores of the shallow lake of Massaciuccoli.
    A mile away, on the further shore, he could see the
    clustering pink and whitewashed houses of the village in which,
    he knew, the grocer’s brother lived and kept his treasure. But
    instead of proceeding directly to the goal of his pilgrimage, Mr.
    Cardan lighted a cigar and lay down on the grass at the side of the
    path. It was a bright clear day. Over the mountains floated
    great clouds, hard-edged against the sky, firm and massive as though
    carved from marble and seeming more solid than the marble
    mountains beneath. A breeze stirred the blue water of the lake
    into innumerable dazzling ripples. It rustled among the leaves
    of the poplars and the sound was like that of the sea heard from far
    off. In the midst of the landscape lay Mr. Cardan, pensively
    smoking his cigar; the smoke of it drifted away along the wind.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Twenty-five thousand pounds, Mr. Cardan was thinking. If
    one were to invest them in the seven per cent. Hungarian Loan,
    they would bring in seventeen hundred and fifty a year. And if
    one lived in Italy that went a long way; one could consider oneself
    rich on that. A nice house in Siena, or Perugia, or Bologna—Bologna
    he decided would be the best; there was nothing to
    compare with Bolognese cooking. A car—one could afford to
    keep something handsome. Plenty of nice books, nice people to
    stay with one all the time, jaunts in comfort through Europe. A
    secure old age; the horrors of decrepitude in poverty for ever
    averted. The only disadvantage—one’s wife happened to be a
    harmless idiot. Still, she’d obviously be most devoted; she’d
    do her best. And one would make her happy, one would even
    allow her a domesticated bear. In fact, Mr. Cardan assured himself,
    it was the poor creature’s only chance of happiness. If she
    stayed with her brother, he’d find some substitute for the inefficient
    anopheles sooner or later. If she fell into the hands of an adventurer
    in need of her money, the chances were that he’d be a great deal
    more of a scoundrel than Tom Cardan. In fact, Mr. Cardan saw,
    he could easily make out a case for its being his bounden duty, for
    the poor girl’s sake, to marry her. That would do very nicely
    for romantic spirits like Lilian Aldwinkle. For them, he’d be the
    gallant rescuer, the Perseus, the chivalrous St. George. Less
    enthusiastic souls might look at the twenty-five thousand and smile.
    But let them smile. After all, Mr. Cardan asked himself, a grin
    more or less—what does it matter? No, the real problem, the
    real difficulty was himself. Could he do it? Wasn’t it, somehow,
    a bit thick—an idiot? Wasn’t it too—too Russian? Too
    Stavroginesque?</p>

    <p class='pindent'>True, his motive would be different from the Russian’s. He
    would marry his idiot for comfort and a placid old age—not for
    the sake of strengthening his moral fibres by hard exercise, not in
    the voluptuous hope of calling new scruples and finer remorses into
    existence, or in the religious hope of developing the higher consciousness
    by leading a low life. But on the other hand, nothing
    could prevent the life from being, in point of fact, thoroughly low;
    and he couldn’t guarantee his conscience against the coming of
    strange qualms. Would seventeen hundred and fifty per annum
    be a sufficient compensation?</p>

    <p class='pindent'>For more than an hour Mr. Cardan lay there, smoking, looking at
    the bright lake, at the ethereal fantastic mountains and the marbly
    clouds, listening to the wind among the leaves and the occasional
    far-away sounds of life, and pondering all the time. In the end
    he decided that seventeen hundred and fifty, or even the smaller
    income that would result from investment in something a little safer
    than seven per cent. Hungarian Loan, was a sufficient compensation.
    He’d do it. Mr. Cardan got up, threw away the stump
    of his second cigar and walked slowly back towards the house. As
    he approached it through the little plantation of poplar trees Miss
    Elver, who had been on the look-out for his return, came running
    out of the gate to meet him. The gaudy upholstery material
    blazed up as she passed out of the shade of the house into the sunlight,
    her coloured beads flashed. Uttering shrill little cries and
    laughing, she ran towards him. Mr. Cardan watched her as she
    came on. He had seen frightened cormorants bobbing their heads
    in a ludicrous anxiety from side to side. He had seen penguins
    waving their little flappers, scuttling along, undignified, on their
    short legs. He had seen vultures with trailing wings hobbling
    and hopping, ungainly, over the ground. Memories of all these
    sights appeared before his mind’s eye as he watched Miss Elver’s
    approach. He sighed profoundly.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I’m so glad you’ve come back,’ Miss Elver cried breathlessly,
    as she approached, ‘I was really afraid you were going right away.’
    She shook his hand earnestly and looked up into his face. ‘You’ve
    not forgotten about the monkeys and the Shetland ponies, have
    you?’ she added, rather anxiously.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Mr. Cardan smiled. ‘Of course not,’ he answered; and he
    added gallantly: ‘How could I forget anything that gives
    you pleasure?’ He squeezed her hand and, bending down,
    kissed it.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Miss Elver’s face flushed very red, then, the moment after,
    became exceedingly pale. Her breath came quickly and unsteadily.
    She shut her eyes. A shuddering ran through her; she wavered
    on her feet, she seemed on the point of falling. Mr. Cardan caught
    her by the arm and held her up. This was going to be worse, he
    thought, than he had imagined; more Stavroginesque. To faint
    when he kissed her hand—kissed it almost ironically—that was too
    much. But probably, he reflected, nothing of the kind had ever
    happened to her before. How many men had ever so much as
    spoken to her? It was understandable.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘My good child—really now.’ He slightly shook her arm.
    ‘Pull yourself together. If you’re going to faint like this I shall
    never be able to trust you with a bear. Come, come.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Still, the understanding of a thing does not alter it. It remains
    what it was when it was still uncomprehended. Seventeen hundred
    and fifty per annum—but at this rate it looked as though that
    would hardly be enough.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Miss Elver opened her eyes and looked at him. Into their
    blankness had come that look of anxious, unhappy love with which
    a child looks at his mother when he thinks that she is going to leave
    him. Mr. Cardan could not have felt more remorseful if he had
    committed a murder.</p>

    <div class='poetry-container' style=''><div class='lgp'> <!-- rend=';' -->
    <p class='line0'>What every weakness, every vice?</p>
    <p class='line0'>Tom Cardan, all were thine.</p>
    </div></div> <!-- end poetry block --><!-- end rend -->

    <p class='noindent'>All the same, there were certain things the doing of which one felt
    to be an outrage. Still, one had to think of those seventeen hundred
    and fifty pounds; one had to think of old age in solitude and
    poverty.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Leaving Miss Elver to play by herself in the garden, Mr. Cardan
    went indoors. He found his host sitting behind closed jalousies
    in a greenish twilight, his head on his hand.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Feeling better?’ asked Mr. Cardan cheerfully; and getting
    no answer, he went on to tell a long, bright story of how he had
    searched for the grocer’s brother, only to find, at last, that he was
    away from home and would be away till to-morrow. ‘So I hope
    you won’t mind,’ he concluded, ‘if I trespass on your charming
    hospitality for another night. Your sister has most kindly told me
    that I might.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Mr. Elver turned on him a glance of concentrated loathing and
    averted his eyes. He said nothing.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Mr. Cardan drew up a chair and sat down. ‘There’s a most
    interesting little book,’ he said, looking at his host with a genial
    twinkling expression, ‘by a certain Mr. W. H. S. Jones called
    “Malaria: a factor in the history of Greece and Rome,” or some
    such title. He shows how the disease may quite suddenly obtain
    a footing in countries hitherto immune and in the course of a few
    generations bring a whole culture, a powerful empire to the ground.
    Conversely he shows how it is got rid of. Drainage, quinine, wire-netting
    .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.’ The other stirred uneasily in his chair; but
    Mr. Cardan went on ruthlessly. When the bell rang for luncheon
    he was talking to Mr. Elver about the only way in which the
    Yellow Peril might be permanently averted.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘First,’ he said, laying the forefinger of his right hand against
    the thumb of his left, ‘first you must introduce malaria into Japan.
    Japan’s immune, so far; it’s a crying scandal. You must start
    by remedying that. And secondly,’ he moved on to the index,
    ‘you must see that the Chinese never have a chance to stamp out
    the disease in their country. Four hundred million malarial
    Chinamen may be viewed with equanimity. But four hundred
    million healthy ones—that’s a very different matter. The spread
    of malaria among the yellow races—there’s a cause,’ said Mr.
    Cardan, rising from his chair, ‘a cause to which some good European
    might profitably devote himself. You, who take so much interest
    in the subject, Mr. Elver, you might find a much worse
    vocation. Shall we go into lunch?’ Mr. Elver rose, totteringly.
    ‘I have a tremendous appetite,’ his guest went on, patting him on
    his bent back. ‘I hope you have too.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Mr. Elver at last broke silence. ‘You’re a damned bully,’ he
    whispered in a passion of misery and futile rage, ‘a damned stinking
    bully.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Come, come,’ said Mr. Cardan. ‘I protest against “stinking.” ’</p>

    <h2>CHAPTER IX</h2>

    <p class='pindent'>Early the next morning Mr. Cardan and his hostess left the
    house and walked rapidly away through the fields in the direction
    of the lake. They had told the old woman that they would be
    back to a late breakfast. Mr. Elver was not yet awake; Mr.
    Cardan had left instructions that he was not to be called before
    half-past nine.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>The ground was still wet with dew when they set out; the poplar
    trees threw shadows longer than themselves. The air was cool; it
    was a pleasure to walk. Mr. Cardan strode along at four miles an
    hour; and like a diver out of water, like a soaring bird reduced to
    walk the earth, Miss Elver trotted along at his side, rolling and
    hopping as she walked, as though she were mounted, not on feet,
    but on a set of eccentric wheels of different diameters. Her face
    seemed to shine with happiness; every now and then she looked
    at Mr. Cardan with shy adoration, and if she happened to catch his
    eye she would blush, turn away her head and laugh. Mr. Cardan
    was almost appalled by the extent of his success and the ease with
    which it had been obtained. He might make a slave of the poor
    creature, might keep her shut up in a rabbit-hutch, and, provided he
    showed himself now and again to be worshipped, she would be
    perfectly happy. The thought made Mr. Cardan feel strangely
    guilty.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘When we’re married,’ said Miss Elver suddenly, ‘shall we
    have some children?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Mr. Cardan smiled rather grimly. ‘The trouble about children,’
    he said, ‘is that the bears might eat them. You can never be quite
    sure of bears. Remember Elisha’s bears and those bad children.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Miss Elver’s face became thoughtful. She walked on for a long
    time in silence.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>They came to the lake, lying placid and very bright under the
    pale early-morning sky. At the sight of it Miss Elver clapped her
    hands with pleasure; she forgot in an instant all her troubles. The
    fatal incompatibility between bears and children ceased to preoccupy
    her. ‘What lovely water!’ she cried, and bending down
    she picked up a pebble from the path and threw it into the lake.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>But Mr. Cardan did not permit her to linger. ‘There’s no
    time to lose,’ he said, and taking her arm he hurried her on.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Where are we going to?’ asked Miss Elver.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>He pointed to the village on the further shore of the lake.
    ‘From there,’ he said, ‘we’ll take some sort of cab or cart.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>The prospect of driving in a cart entirely reconciled Miss Elver
    to parting at such short notice with the lake. ‘That’ll be lovely,’
    she declared, and trotted on so fast that Mr. Cardan had to quicken
    his pace in order to keep up with her.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>While the little carriage was being made ready and the horse
    put in and harnessed—hastelessly, as these things are always done
    in Italy, with dignity and at leisure—Mr. Cardan went to visit
    the grocer’s brother. Now that he had come so far it would be
    foolish to miss the opportunity of seeing the treasure. The grocer’s
    brother was himself a grocer, and so like his relative that Mr. Cardan
    could almost fancy it was Miss Thriplow’s virtuous and simple
    friend from the hill-top to whom he was now speaking in the plain.
    When Mr. Cardan explained his business the man bowed, wreathed
    himself in smiles, laughed and blew acetylene into his face just as his
    brother had done. He expatiated on the beauty and the antiquity
    of his treasure, and when Mr. Cardan begged him to make haste
    and show him the sculpture, he would not suffer himself to be
    interrupted, but went on lyrically with his description, repeating
    the same phrases again and again and gesticulating until he began
    to sweat. At last, when he considered Mr. Cardan worked up to
    a due state of preliminary enthusiasm, the grocer opened the door
    at the back of the shop and mysteriously beckoned to his visitor to
    follow him. They walked down a dark passage, through a kitchen
    full of tumbling children on whom one had to be careful not to
    tread, across a little yard and into a mouldering out-house. The
    grocer led the way, walking all the time on tip-toe and speaking
    only in a whisper—for what reason Mr. Cardan could not imagine,
    unless it was to impress him with the profound importance of the
    affair, and perhaps to suggest that the beauty and antiquity of the
    work of art were such that it was only barefoot and in silence that
    it should be approached.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Wait there,’ he whispered impressively, as they entered the
    out-house.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Mr. Cardan waited. The grocer tip-toed across to the further
    corner of the shed. Mysteriously draped in sacking, something
    that might have been an ambushed man stood motionless in the
    shadow. The grocer halted in front of it and, standing a little to
    one side so as to give Mr. Cardan an uninterrupted view of the
    marvel to be revealed, took hold of a corner of the sacking, and with
    a magnificently dramatic gesture whisked it off.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>There emerged the marble effigy of what in the imagination of a
    monumental mason of 1830 figured as a Poet. A slenderer Byron
    with yet more hyacinthine hair and a profile borrowed from one
    of Canova’s Greeks, he stood, leaning against a truncated column,
    his marble eyes turned upwards in pursuit of the flying Muse. A
    cloak hung lankly from his shoulders; a vine leaf was all the rest
    of his costume. On the top of the truncated column lay a half-opened
    marble scroll, which the Poet’s left hand held down for
    fear it should be blown clean away by the wind of inspiration.
    His right, it was evident, had originally poised above the virgin page
    a stylus. But the hand, alas, and the whole forearm almost to the
    elbow were gone. At the base of the column was a little square
    tablet on which, if the figure had ever been put to its proper monumental
    use, should have been written the name and claims to fame
    of the poet upon whose tomb it was to stand. But the tablet was
    blank. At the time this statue was carved there had evidently
    been a dearth of lyrists in the principality of Massa Carrara.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘E bellissimo!’ said the grocer’s brother, standing back and
    looking at it with a connoisseur’s enthusiasm.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Davvero,’ Mr. Cardan agreed. He thought sadly of his recumbent
    Etruscan, his sarcophagus by Jacopo della Quercia, his
    Romanesque demon. Still, he reflected, even a bas-relief by Giotto
    would hardly have brought him five-and-twenty thousand pounds.</p>

    <h2>CHAPTER X</h2>

    <p class='pindent'>Mr. Cardan returned to the palace of the Cybo Malaspina
    to find that the number of guests had been increased during his
    absence by the arrival of Mrs. Chelifer. Mrs. Aldwinkle had not
    been particularly anxious to have Chelifer’s mother in the house,
    but finding that Chelifer was preparing to leave as soon as his mother
    should arrive, she peremptorily insisted on giving the lady hospitality.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘It’s absurd,’ she argued, ‘to go down again to that horrible
    hotel at Marina di Vezza, stay there uncomfortably for a few days
    and then go to Rome by train. You must bring your mother here,
    and then, when it’s time for Mr. Falx to go to his conference,
    we’ll all go to Rome in the car. It’ll be far pleasanter.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Chelifer tried to object; but Mrs. Aldwinkle would not hear of
    objections. When Mrs. Chelifer arrived at the station of Vezza
    she found Francis waiting for her on the platform with Mrs. Aldwinkle,
    in yellow tussore and a floating white veil, at his side. The
    welcome she got from Mrs. Aldwinkle was far more effusively
    affectionate than that which she got from her son. A little
    bewildered, but preserving all her calm and gentle dignity, Mrs.
    Chelifer suffered herself to be led towards the Rolls-Royce.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘We all admire your son so enormously,’ said Mrs. Aldwinkle.
    ‘He’s so—how shall I say?—so <span class='it'>post bellum</span>, so essentially one of
    <span class='it'>us</span>.’ Mrs. Aldwinkle made haste to establish her position among
    the youngest of the younger generation. ‘All that one only dimly
    feels he expresses. Can you be surprised at our admiration?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>So far Mrs. Chelifer was rather surprised by everything. It took
    her some time to get used to Mrs. Aldwinkle. Nor was the aspect
    of the palace calculated to allay her astonishment.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘A superb specimen of early baroque,’ Mrs. Aldwinkle assured
    her, pointing with her parasol. But even after she knew the dates,
    it all seemed to Mrs. Chelifer rather queer.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Mrs. Aldwinkle remained extremely cordial to her new guest;
    but in secret she disliked Mrs. Chelifer extremely. There would
    have been small reason, in any circumstances, for Mrs. Aldwinkle
    to have liked her. The two women had nothing in common;
    their views of life were different and irreconcilable, they had lived
    in separate worlds. At the best of times Mrs. Aldwinkle would
    have found her guest <span class='it'>bourgeoise</span> and <span class='it'>bornée</span>. As things actually
    were she loathed her. And no wonder; for in his mother Chelifer
    had a permanent and unexceptionable excuse for getting away from
    Mrs. Aldwinkle. Mrs. Aldwinkle naturally resented the presence
    in her house of this cause and living justification of infidelity. At
    the same time it was necessary for her to keep on good terms with
    Mrs. Chelifer; for if she quarrelled with the mother, it was obvious
    that the son would take himself off. Inwardly chafing, Mrs. Aldwinkle
    continued to treat her with the same gushing affection
    as at first.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>To Mrs. Aldwinkle’s guests the arrival of Mrs. Chelifer was
    more welcome than to herself. Mr. Falx found in her a more
    sympathetic and comprehensible soul than he could discover in
    his hostess. To Lord Hovenden and Irene her arrival meant the
    complete cessation of Irene’s duties as a spy; they liked her well
    enough, moreover, for her own sake.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘A nice old fing,’ was how Lord Hovenden summed her up.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Miss Thriplow affected almost to worship her.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘She’s so wonderfully good and simple and <span class='it'>integral</span>, if you
    understand what I mean,’ Miss Thriplow explained to Calamy.
    ‘To be able to be so undividedly enthusiastic about folk-songs and
    animals’ rights and all that sort of thing—it’s really wonderful.
    She’s a lesson to us,’ Miss Thriplow concluded, ‘a lesson.’ Mrs.
    Chelifer became endowed, for her, with all the qualities that the
    village grocer had unfortunately not possessed. The symbol of his
    virtues—if only he had possessed them—had been the white apron;
    Mrs. Chelifer’s integrity was figured forth by her dateless grey dresses.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘She’s one of Nature’s Quakeresses,’ Miss Thriplow declared.
    ‘If only one could be born like that!’ There had been a time,
    not so long ago, when she had aspired to be one of Nature’s Guardswomen.
    ‘I never knew that anything so good and dove-coloured
    existed outside of Academy subject-pictures of 1880. You know:
    “A Pilgrim Mother on Board the Mayflower,” or something of that
    sort. It’s absurd in the Academy. But it’s lovely in real life.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Calamy agreed.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>But the person who most genuinely liked Mrs. Chelifer was
    Grace Elver. From the moment she set eyes on Mrs. Chelifer,
    Grace was her dog-like attendant. And Mrs. Chelifer responded
    by practically adopting her for the time being. When he learned
    the nature of her tastes and occupations, Mr. Cardan explained her
    kindness to himself by the hypothesis that poor Grace was the nearest
    thing to a stray dog or cat that Mrs. Chelifer could find. Conversely,
    Grace’s love at first sight must be due to the realization by
    that cat-like mind that here was a born protector and friend. In
    any case, he was exceedingly grateful to Mrs. Chelifer for having
    made her appearance when she did. Her presence in the house
    made easy what would otherwise have been a difficult situation.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>That Mrs. Aldwinkle would be impressed by the romantic story
    of Grace’s abduction Mr. Cardan had always been certain. And
    when he told the story, she <span class='it'>was</span> impressed, though less profoundly
    than Mr. Cardan had hoped; she was too much preoccupied with
    her own affairs to be able to respond with her customary enthusiasm
    to what, at other times, would have been an irresistible appeal.
    About her reception of the story, then, Mr. Cardan had never
    entertained a doubt; he knew that she would find it romantic.
    But that was no guarantee that she would like the heroine of the
    story. From what he knew of her, which was a great deal, Mr.
    Cardan felt sure that she would very quickly find poor Grace
    exceedingly tiresome. He knew her lack of patience and her
    intolerance. Grace would get on her nerves; Lilian would be
    unkind, and goodness only knew what scenes might follow.
    Mr. Cardan had brought her to the palace meaning to stay only a
    day or two and then take his leave, before Mrs. Aldwinkle had
    had time to get poor Grace on her nerves. But the presence of
    Mrs. Chelifer made him change his mind. Her affectionate protection
    was a guarantee against Mrs. Aldwinkle’s impatience; more
    important still, it had the best possible effect on Grace herself. In
    Mrs. Chelifer’s presence she behaved quietly and sensibly, like a
    child doing its best to make a good impression. Mrs. Chelifer,
    moreover, kept a tenderly watchful eye on her appearance and her
    manners; kept her up to the mark about washing her hands and
    brushing her hair, dropped a gentle hint when she was not behaving
    as well as she ought to at table, and checked her propensity to eat
    too much of the things she liked and not enough of those she didn’t
    like. Mrs. Chelifer, it was obvious, had the best possible influence
    over her. When they were married, Mr. Cardan decided, he
    would frequently invite Mrs. Chelifer to stay—preferably, though
    she was a very nice old thing, while he was away from home.
    Meanwhile, secure that his residence at the palace of the Cybo
    Malaspina would be marred by no disagreeable incidents, he wrote
    to his lawyer to make the necessary arrangements about his marriage.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>For her part, Mrs. Chelifer was delighted to have found Grace.
    As Mr. Cardan had divined, she missed her cats and dogs, her poor
    children and traditional games. It was very reluctantly that she
    had at last given up the old Oxford house; very reluctantly, though
    the arguments that Francis had used to persuade her were unanswerable.
    It was too large for her, it was full of those mediaeval
    labour-creating devices of which Mr. Ruskin and his architectural
    followers were so fond, it cost more to keep up than she could afford;
    moreover, it was unhealthy, she was regularly ill there every winter;
    the doctors had been urging her for years past to get out of the
    Thames valley. Yes, the arguments were quite unanswerable;
    but it had been a long time before she had finally made up her mind
    to leave the place. Forty years of her life had been passed there;
    she was loth to part with all those memories. And then there were
    the dogs and the poor children, all her old friends and her charities.
    In the end, however, she had allowed herself to be persuaded.
    The house was sold; it was arranged that she should spend the
    winter in Rome.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Now you’re free,’ her son had said.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>But Mrs. Chelifer rather mournfully shook her head. ‘I don’t
    know that I very much like being free,’ she answered. ‘I shall be
    without occupation in Rome. I look forward to it almost with
    dread.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Francis reassured her. ‘You’ll soon find something,’ he said.
    ‘Don’t be afraid of that.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Shall I?’ Mrs. Chelifer questioned doubtfully. They were
    walking together in the little garden at the back of the house;
    looking round her at the familiar grass plot and flower beds, she
    sighed.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>But Francis was right; dogs, poor children or their equivalents
    are fortunately not rare. At the end of the first stage of her
    journey Mrs. Chelifer had found, in Grace Elver, a compensation
    for what she had abandoned at Oxford. Attending to poor Grace
    she was happy.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>For the rest of the party Miss Elver’s arrival had no special or
    personal significance. For them she was just Mr. Cardan’s half-wit;
    that was all. Even Mary Thriplow, who might have been
    expected to take an interest in so genuine a specimen of the simple
    soul, paid little attention to her. The fact was that Grace was
    really too simple to be interesting. Simplicity is no virtue unless
    you are potentially complicated. Mrs. Chelifer, being with all
    her simplicity a woman of intelligence, threw light, Miss Thriplow
    felt, on her own case. Grace was simple only as a child or an
    imbecile is simple; her didactic value was therefore nil. Miss
    Thriplow remained faithful to Mrs. Chelifer.</p>

    <h2>CHAPTER XI</h2>

    <p class='pindent'>It was night. Half undressed, Irene was sitting on the edge of
    her bed stitching away at an unfinished garment of pale pink silk.
    Her head was bent over her work and her thick hair hung perpendicularly
    down on either side, making an angle with her tilted
    face. The light clung richly to her bare arms and shoulders, was
    reflected by the curved and glossy surfaces of her tight-drawn
    stockings. Her face was extremely grave; the tip of her tongue
    appeared between her teeth. It was a difficult job.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Round her, on the walls of the enormous room which had once
    been the bedchamber of the Cardinal Alderano Malaspina, fluttered
    an army of gesticulating shapes. Over the door sat God the Father,
    dressed in a blue crêpe de Chine tunic and enveloped in a mantle of
    red velvet, which fluttered in the divine afflatus as though it had
    been so much bunting. His right hand was extended; and in
    obedience to the gesture a squadron of angels went flying down one
    of the side walls towards the window. At a <span class='it'>prie-Dieu</span> in the far
    corner knelt Cardinal Malaspina, middle-aged, stout, with a <span class='it'>barbiche</span>
    and moustache, and looking altogether, Irene thought, like
    the current British idea of a French chef. The Archangel Michael,
    at the head of his troop of Principalities and Powers, was hovering
    in the air above him, and with an expression on his face of mingled
    condescension and respect—condescension, inasmuch as he was the
    plenipotentiary of the <span class='it'>Padre Eterno</span>, and respect, in view of the fact
    that His Eminence was a brother of the Prince of Massa Carrara—was
    poising above the prelate’s head the red symbolic hat that
    was to make him a Prince of the Church. On the opposite wall the
    Cardinal was represented doing battle with the powers of darkness.
    Dressed in scarlet robes he stood undaunted on the brink of the
    bottomless pit. Behind him was a carefully painted view of the
    Malaspina palace, with a group of retainers and handsome coaches
    in the middle distance and, immediately behind their Uncle, whom
    they gallantly supported by their prayers, the Cardinal’s nephews.
    From the pit came up legions of hideous devils who filled the air
    with the flapping of their wings. But the Cardinal was more than
    a match for them. Raising a crucifix above his head, he conjured
    them to return to the flames. And the foiled devils, gnashing their
    teeth and trembling with terror, were hurled back towards the pit.
    Head foremost, tail foremost, in every possible position they came
    hurtling down towards the floor. When she lay in bed, Irene could
    see half a dozen devils diving down at her; and when she woke
    up in the morning, a pair of plunging legs waved frantically within
    a foot of her opening eyes. In the wall space over the windows the
    Cardinal’s cultured leisures were allegorically celebrated. Nine
    Muses and three Graces, attended by a troop of Hours, reclined
    or stood, or danced in studied postures; while the Cardinal himself,
    enthroned in the midst, listened to their conversation and proffered
    his own opinions without appearing to notice the fact that all the
    ladies were stark naked. No one but the most polished and accomplished
    man of the world could have behaved in the circumstances
    with such perfect <span class='it'>savoir-vivre</span>.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>In the midst of the Cardinal’s apotheosis and entirely oblivious
    of it, Irene stitched away at her pink chemise. Undressing, just
    now, she had caught sight of it lying here in her work-basket; she
    hadn’t been able to resist the temptation of adding a touch or two
    there and then. It was going to be one of her masterpieces when
    it was done. She held it out in her two hands, at arm’s length,
    and looked at it, lovingly and critically. It was simply too
    lovely.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Ever since Chelifer’s arrival she had been able to do a lot of
    work on her underclothes. Mrs. Aldwinkle, absorbed by her unhappy
    passion, had completely forgotten that she had a niece who
    ought to be writing lyrics and painting in water-colours. Irene
    was free to devote all her time to her sewing. She did not neglect
    the opportunity. But every now and then her conscience would
    suddenly prick her and she would ask herself whether, after all, it
    was quite fair to take advantage of poor Aunt Lilian’s mournful
    preoccupation to do what she did not approve of. She would
    wonder if she oughtn’t, out of loyalty to Aunt Lilian, to stop sewing
    and make a sketch or write a poem. Once or twice in the first days
    she even acted on the advice of her conscience. But when in the
    evening she brought Aunt Lilian her sketch of the temple, and the
    lyric beginning ‘O Moon, how calmly in the midnight sky .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.’—brought
    them with a certain triumph, a consciousness of virtuous
    actions duly performed—that distracted lady showed so little
    interest in these artistic tokens of niecely duty and affection that
    Irene felt herself excused henceforward from making any further
    effort to practise the higher life. She went on with her stitching.
    Her conscience, it is true, still troubled her at times; but she did
    nothing about it.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>This evening she felt no conscientious qualm. The garment was
    so lovely that even Aunt Lilian, she felt sure, would have approved
    of it. It was a work of art—a work of art that deserved that
    honourable title just as richly as ‘O Moon, how calmly in the
    midnight sky’; perhaps even more richly.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Irene folded up the unfinished masterpiece in rose, put it away,
    and went on with her undressing. To-night, she decided, as she
    brushed her hair, she would tell Aunt Lilian how right she had been
    about Hovenden. That ought to please her. ‘How grateful I
    am,’ she would say. And she’d tell her how much she liked him—almost,
    almost in <span class='it'>that</span> way. Not quite yet. But soon; she felt
    somehow that it might happen soon. And it would be the real
    thing. Real and solid. Not flimsy and fizzy and imaginary, like
    the episodes with Peter and Jacques and the rest of them.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>She put on her dressing-gown and walked down the long corridor
    to Mrs. Aldwinkle’s room. Cardinal Alderano was left alone with
    his devils and the obsequious angels, his nine naked Muses and the
    Eternal Father.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>When Irene came in, Aunt Lilian was sitting in front of her
    looking-glass, rubbing skin food into her face.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘It appears,’ she said, looking at herself in the glass, critically,
    as Irene had looked at her masterpiece of fine sewing, ‘that there’s
    such a wonderful electric massage machine. I forget who told
    me about it.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Was it Lady Belfry?’ Irene suggested. The image of Lady
    Belfry’s face floated up before her mind’s eye—smooth, pink, round,
    youthful looking, but with that factitious and terribly precarious
    youthfulness of beauty scientifically preserved.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Perhaps it was,’ said Mrs. Aldwinkle. ‘I must certainly get
    one of them. Write to Harrods’ about it to-morrow, will you,
    darling?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Irene began the nightly brushing of her aunt’s hair. There was
    a long silence. How should she begin about Hovenden? Irene was
    thinking. She must begin in some way that would show how really
    and genuinely serious it all was. She must begin in such a way that
    Aunt Lilian would have no possible justification for taking up a
    playful tone about it. At all costs, Aunt Lilian must not be allowed
    to talk to her in that well-known and dreaded vein of bludgeoning
    banter; on no account must she be given an opportunity for saying:
    ‘Did she think then that her silly old auntie didn’t notice?’ or
    anything of that kind. But to find the completely fun-proof
    formula was not so easy. Irene searched for it long and thoughtfully.
    She was not destined to find it. For Aunt Lilian, who had
    also been thinking, suddenly broke the silence.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I sometimes doubt,’ she said, ‘whether he takes any interest
    in women at all. Fundamentally, unconsciously, I believe he’s a
    homosexualist.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Perhaps,’ said Irene gravely. She knew her Havelock Ellis.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>For the next half-hour Mrs. Aldwinkle and her niece discussed
    the interesting possibility.</p>

    <h2>CHAPTER XII</h2>

    <p class='pindent'>Miss Thriplow was writing in her secret note-book.
    ‘There are people,’ she wrote, ‘who seem to have no capacity for
    feeling deeply or passionately about anything. It is a kind of
    emotional impotence for which one can only pity them profoundly.
    Perhaps there are more of these people nowadays than there were.
    But that’s only an impression; one has no facts to go on, no justifying
    documents. But if it’s the case, it’s due, I suppose, to our
    intellectualizing education. One has to have a strong emotional
    constitution to be able to stand it. And then one lives so artificially
    that many of the profounder instincts rarely get an opportunity for
    displaying themselves. Fear, for example, and all the desperate
    passions evoked by the instinct of self-preservation in face of danger
    or hunger. Thousands of civilized people pass through life condemned
    to an almost complete ignorance of these emotions.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Miss Thriplow drew a line under this paragraph and began
    again a little further down the page.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘To love primitively, with fury. To be no more civilized, but
    savage. No more critical, but whole-heartedly passionate. No
    more a troubled and dubious mind, but a young, healthy body
    certain and unwavering in its desires. The beast knows everything,
    says Uncle Yerochka in Tolstoy. Not everything; no. But he
    knows, at any rate, all the things the mind does not know. The
    strong complete spirit must know what the beast knows as well as
    what the mind knows.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>She drew another line.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘His hands are so strong and firm, and yet touch so softly. His
    lips are soft. Where his neck joins his body, in front, between
    the two strong tendons, where they converge towards the collar
    bone, is a boldly marked depression in the flesh that looks as though
    it had been made by the thumb of an artist god, so beautiful it is.
    So beautiful .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>It occurred to Miss Thriplow that there would be an excellent
    article to be written round the theme of masculine beauty. In the
    Song of Solomon it is described as lyrically as feminine beauty.
    It is rare to find modern poetesses expressing so frank an admiration.
    In the Paris Salons it is the female nude which prevails; the male is
    exceptional and, when complete, seems a little shocking. How
    different from the state of things in Pompeii! Miss Thriplow bit
    the end of her pen. Yes, decidedly, it would make a capital
    article.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘His skin is white and smooth,’ she went on writing. ‘How
    strong he is! His eyes are sleepy; but sometimes they seem to
    wake up and he looks at me so piercingly and commandingly that
    I am frightened. But I like being frightened—by him.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Another line. Miss Thriplow would have written more on this
    subject; but she was always apprehensive that somebody might
    find her note-book and read it. She did not want that to happen
    till she was dead. Miss Thriplow made an asterisk by the side of
    the first of the evening’s notes. In the margin of the blank page
    opposite she scratched a similar sign, to indicate that what she was
    going to write now was in the nature of an appendix or corollary
    to what she had written in the first note.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Certain people,’ she wrote, ‘who have no natural capacity for
    profound feeling are yet convinced, intellectually, that they ought
    to feel profoundly. The best people, they think, have formidable
    instincts. They want to have them too. They are the emotional
    snobs. This type, I am sure, is new. In the eighteenth century
    people tried to make out that they were rational and polished. The
    cult of the emotions began in the nineteenth. It has had a new
    turn given to it by Bergsonism and Romain-Rollandism in the
    twentieth century. It is fashionable now to be exactly the opposite
    of what it was fashionable to be in the eighteenth century. So that
    you get emotionally impotent people simulating passion with their
    minds. Hypocrites of instinct, they often more than half deceive
    themselves. And, if they are intelligent, they completely deceive
    all but the most observant of those around them. They act the
    emotional part better than those who actually feel the emotions.
    It is Diderot’s paradox of the comedian, in real life; the less you
    feel, the better you represent feeling. But while the comedian
    on the stage plays only for the audience in the theatre, those in real
    life perform as much for an inward as an outward gallery; they ask
    for applause also from themselves and, what is more, they get it;
    though always, I suppose, with certain secret reservations. What
    a curious type it is! I have known many specimens of it.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Miss Thriplow stopped writing and thought of the specimens she
    had known. There was a surprisingly large number of them.
    Every human being is inclined to see his own qualities and weaknesses
    in others. Inevitably: since his own mental and moral
    attributes are the only ones of which he has any personal experience.
    The man who visualizes his multiplication table in a fantastic and
    definite picture imagines that all other men must do the same;
    the musician cannot conceive of a mind that is irresponsive to music.
    Similarly the ambitious man presumes that all his fellows are actuated
    by his own desire to achieve distinction and power. The
    sensualist sees sensuality everywhere. The mean man takes it for
    granted that everybody else is mean. But it must not be thought
    that the possessor of a vice who sees his own weakness in all his
    fellows therefore condones that weakness. We rarely give our own
    weaknesses their specific name, and are aware of them only in a
    vague and empirical fashion. The conscious and educated part of
    us condemns the vice to which we are congenitally subject. At the
    same time, our personal knowledge of the vice—a knowledge not
    conscious or intellectual, but obscure, practical and instinctive—tends
    to direct the attention of the superficial, educated part of the
    mind to manifestations of this particular weakness, tends even to
    make it detect such manifestations when they do not exist; so that
    we are constantly struck by the ludicrous spectacle of the avaricious
    passionately condemning avarice in others much more generous
    than themselves, of the lascivious crying out on lasciviousness, the
    greedy criticizing greed. Their education has taught them that
    these vices are blameworthy, while their personal and empirical
    knowledge of them causes them to take a special interest in these
    weaknesses and to see signs of them everywhere.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>If the number of Miss Thriplow’s friends who belonged to the
    type of the emotionally impotent was surprisingly large, the fact
    was due to a tendency in Miss Thriplow herself towards precisely
    this spiritual weakness. Being by nature a good deal more acute
    and self-analytic than most of the men and women who indignantly
    castigate their own inveterate sins, Miss Thriplow was not unaware,
    while she criticized others, of the similar defect in herself. She
    could not help suspecting, when she read Dostoievsky and Tchehov,
    that she was organized differently from these Russians. It seemed
    to her that she felt nothing so acutely, with such an intricate joy
    or misery as did they. And even before she had started reading
    the Russians, Miss Thriplow had come to the painful conclusion
    that if the Brontë sisters were emotionally normal, then she must
    be decidedly sub-normal. And even if they weren’t quite normal,
    even if they were feverish, she desired to be like them; they seemed
    to her entirely admirable. It was the knowledge of her sub-normality
    (which she had come, however, to attribute to a lack of
    opportunities—we lead such sheltered, artificial lives—for the
    display of her potential passions and emotions) that had made Miss
    Thriplow so passionate an admirer of fine spontaneous feelings.
    It caused her at the same time to be willing and anxious to embrace
    every opportunity that presented itself for the testing of her reactions.
    It is experience that makes us aware of what we are; if
    it were not for contacts with the world outside ourselves we should
    have no emotions at all. In order to get to know her latent
    emotional self, Miss Thriplow desired to have as much experience,
    to make as many contacts with external reality as possible. When
    the external reality was of an unusual character and offered to be
    particularly fruitful in emotional revelations, she sought it with a
    special eagerness. Thus, a love affair with Calamy had seemed
    to her fraught with the most interesting emotional possibilities.
    She would have liked him well enough even if his drowsiness had
    concealed no inward fires. But the conviction that there was
    something ‘queer,’ as Mrs. Aldwinkle would say, and dangerous
    about the man made her imagine at every stage of their intimacy
    that she liked him better than she actually did; made her anxious
    to advance to further stages in the hope that, as he revealed himself,
    ampler and more interesting revelations of her own hidden soul
    might there be awaiting her. She had had her reward; Calamy
    had already genuinely frightened her, had revealed himself as
    excitingly brutal.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘You exasperate me so much,’ he had said, ‘that I could wring
    your neck.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>And there were moments when she half believed that he really
    would kill her. It was a new kind of love. She abandoned herself
    to it with a fervour which she found, taking its temperature, very
    admirable. The flood of passion carried her along; Miss Thriplow
    took notes of her sensations on the way and hoped that there
    would be more and intenser sensations to record in the future.</p>

    <h2>CHAPTER XIII</h2>

    <p class='pindent'>Calamy lay on his back, quite still, looking up into the
    darkness. Up there, he was thinking, so near that it’s only a
    question of reaching out a hand to draw back the curtaining
    darkness that conceals it, up there, just above me, floats the great
    secret, the beauty and the mystery. To look into the depths
    of that mystery, to fix the eyes of the spirit on that bright and
    enigmatic beauty, to pore over the secret until its symbols cease
    to be opaque and the light filters through from beyond—there is
    nothing else in life, for me at any rate, that matters; there is no
    rest or possibility of satisfaction in doing anything else.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>All this was obvious to him now. And it was obvious, too, that
    he could not do two things at once; he couldn’t at the same time
    lean out into the silence beyond the futile noise and bustle—into
    the mental silence that lies beyond the body—he couldn’t at the
    same time do this and himself partake in the tumult; and if he
    wanted to look into the depths of mind, he must not interpose a
    preoccupation with his bodily appetites.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>He had known all this so well and so long; and still he went on
    in the same way of life. He knew that he ought to change, to do
    something different, and he profoundly resented this knowledge.
    Deliberately he acted against it. Instead of making an effort to
    get out of the noise and bustle, to break away from his enslavement
    and do what he ought to do, what he knew that, really and profoundly,
    he wanted to do, he had more than once, when his bonds
    had seemed on the point of falling away of themselves, deliberately
    tightened them. He resented this necessity of changing, even
    though it was a necessity imposed on him, not from without, but
    by what he knew to be the most intelligent part of his own being.
    He was afraid, too, that if he changed he would be making himself
    ridiculous. It was not that he desired to live as he had until a
    year ago. That dreary and fatiguing routine of pleasure had
    become intolerable; he had broken definitely with that. No; he
    pictured a sort of graceful Latin compromise. An Epicurean
    cultivation of mind and body. Breakfast at nine. Serious reading
    from ten till one. Luncheon prepared by an excellent French cook.
    In the afternoon a walk and talk with intelligent friends. Tea with
    crumpets and the most graceful of female society. A frugal but
    exquisite supper. Three hours’ meditation about the Absolute, and
    then bed, not unaccompanied.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. It sounded charming. But
    somehow it wouldn’t do. To the liver of this perfect Life of
    Reason the secret, the mystery and the beauty, though they might
    be handled and examined, refused to give up their significance. If
    one really wanted to know about them, one must do more than
    meditate upon them of an evening between the French chef’s
    masterpiece of maigre cooking and the night’s rest, not in solitude.
    In these delightful Latin circumstances the secret, the mystery
    and the beauty reduced themselves to nothing. One thought
    of them only because they were amusing and to pass the time;
    they were really no more important than the tea with crumpets,
    the vegetarian supper and the amorous repose. If one
    wanted them to be more than these, one must abandon oneself
    completely to the contemplation of them. There could be no
    compromise.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Calamy knew this. But all the same he had made love to Mary
    Thriplow, not because he had felt an overwhelming passionate
    necessity to do so; but because she amused him, because her prettiness,
    her air of unreal innocence exasperated his senses, more than
    all because he felt that a love affair with Mary Thriplow would
    keep him thoroughly occupied and prevent him from thinking
    about anything else. It had not. The beauty and the mystery
    still hung just above him when he lay alone in the darkness. They
    were still there; his affair with Mary Thriplow merely prevented
    him from approaching them.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Down in the valley a clock struck one. The sound reminded
    him that he had promised to go to her to-night. He found himself
    thinking of what would happen when they met, of the kisses,
    the caresses given and received. Angrily he tried to turn his
    thoughts to other themes; he tried to think of the mystery and
    the beauty that floated there, above him, on the further side of
    the curtaining darkness. But however vehemently he strove to
    expel them, the charnel images kept returning again and again to
    his mind.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I won’t go,’ he said to himself; but he knew while he was
    saying it that he would. With an extraordinary vividness he
    imagined her lying on the crook of his arm, extenuated, limp and
    shuddering, like one who has been tormented on the rack. Yes,
    he knew that he would go.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>The notion of torture continued to haunt his mind. He thought
    of those poor wretches who, accused of sorcery, admitted after the
    third day’s torment that they had indeed flown along the wind,
    passed through keyholes, taken the form of wolves and conjoined
    themselves with incubi; who would admit, not only these things,
    but also, after another hour on the rack, that they had accomplices,
    that this man, that woman, that young child were also sorcerers
    and servants of the devil. The spirit is willing, but the flesh is
    weak. Weak in pain, but weaker still, he thought, more inexcusably
    weak, in pleasure. For under the torments of pleasure, what
    cowardices, what betrayals of self and of others will it not commit!
    How lightly it will lie and perjure itself! How glibly, with a word,
    condemn others to suffer! How abjectly it will surrender happiness
    and almost life itself for a moment’s prolongation of the delicious
    torture! The shame that follows is the spirit’s resentment, its
    sad indignation at its bondage and humiliation.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Under the torment of pleasure, he thought, women are weaker
    than men. Their weakness flatters their lover’s consciousness of
    strength, gratifies his desire for power. On one of his own sex a
    man will vent his love of power by making him suffer; but on a
    woman by making her enjoy. It is more the pleasurable torment
    he inflicts than what is inflicted upon him that delights the
    lover.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>And since man is less weak, Calamy went on thinking, since
    pleasure with him is never so annihilating that he cannot take
    greater pleasure in the torment of his tormentor, is he not therefore
    the less excusable for breaking faith with himself or others under
    the delicious torture or the desire and anticipation of it? Man
    has less physical justification for his weakness and his enslavement.
    Woman is made by nature to be enslaved—by love, by
    children. But every now and then a man is born who ought to
    be free. For such a man it is disgraceful to succumb under the
    torture.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>If I could free myself, he thought, I could surely do something;
    nothing useful, no doubt, in the ordinary sense, nothing that would
    particularly profit other people; but something that for me would
    be of the last importance. The mystery floats just above me. If
    I were free, if I had time, if I could think and think and slowly
    learn to plumb the silences of the spirit .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>The image of Mary Thriplow presented itself again to his mind’s
    eye. Limply she lay in the crook of his arm, trembling as though
    after torment. He shut his eyes; angrily he shook his head. The
    image would not leave him. If I were free, he said to himself,
    if I were free .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>In the end he got out of bed and opened the door. The corridor
    was brightly illumined; an electric light was left burning all night.
    Calamy was just about to step out, when another door a little
    further down the passage was violently thrown open and Mr. Falx,
    his legs showing thin and hairy below the hem of a night-shirt,
    impetuously emerged. Calamy retired into the shadowed embrasure
    of his door. With the anxious, harrowed expression on his
    face of one who suffers from colic, Mr. Falx hurried past, looking
    neither to the left hand nor to the right. He turned down another
    passage which entered the main corridor a few yards away and
    disappeared; a door slammed. When he was out of sight, Calamy
    walked softly and rapidly down the corridor, opened the fourth
    door on the left and disappeared into the darkness. A little later
    Mr. Falx returned, at leisure, to his room.</p>

    <div><span class='pageno' title='272' id='Page_272'></span><h1>PART IV<br/> <span class='sub-head'>THE JOURNEY</span></h1></div>

    <h2>CHAPTER I</h2>

    <p class='pindent'>Lord Hovenden detached from his motor car was an
    entirely different being from the Lord Hovenden who lounged
    with such a deceptive air of languor behind the steering-wheel of a
    Vauxhall Velox. Half an hour spent in the roaring wind of his
    own speed transformed him from a shy and diffident boy into a
    cool-headed hero, daring not merely in the affairs of the road, but
    in the affairs of life as well. The fierce wind blew away his
    diffidence; the speed intoxicated him out of his self-consciousness.
    All his victories had been won while he was in the car. It was in
    the car—eighteen months ago, before he came of age—that he had
    ventured to ask his guardian to increase his allowance; and he had
    driven faster and faster until, in sheer terror, his guardian had agreed
    to do whatever he wished. It was on board the Velox that he had
    ventured to tell Mrs. Terebinth, who was seventeen years older
    than he, had four children and adored her husband, that she was
    the most beautiful woman he had ever seen; he had bawled it at
    her while they were doing seventy-five on the Great North Road.
    At sixty, at sixty-five, at seventy, his courage had still been inadequate
    to the achievement; but at seventy-five it reached the
    sticking-point: he had told her. And when she laughed and told
    him that he was an impudent young shrimp, he felt not a whit
    abashed, but laughed back, pressed the accelerator down a little
    further, and when the needle of the speedometer touched eighty,
    shouted through the wind and the noise of the engine: ‘But I
    love you.’ Unfortunately, however, the drive came to an end
    soon after; all drives must come to an end, sooner or later. The
    <span class='it'>affaire</span> Terebinth went no further. If only, Lord Hovenden
    regretfully sighed, if only one could spend all one’s life in the Velox!
    But the Velox had its disadvantages. There were occasions when
    the heroic, speed-intoxicated self had got the timorous pedestrian
    into awkward scrapes. There was that time, for example, when,
    rolling along at sixty, he had airily promised one of his advanced
    political friends to make a speech at a meeting. The prospect,
    while one was doing sixty, had seemed not merely unalarming, but
    positively attractive. But what agonies he suffered when he was
    standing on the solid earth again, at his journey’s end! How
    impossibly formidable the undertaking seemed! How bitterly he
    cursed himself for his folly in having accepted the invitation! In
    the end he was reduced to telegraphing that his doctor had ordered
    him peremptorily to the south of France. He fled, ignominiously.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>To-day the Velox had its usual effect on him. At Vezza, when
    they started, he was all shyness and submission. He assented
    meekly to all the arrangements that Mrs. Aldwinkle made and remade
    every five minutes, however contradictory and impossible.
    He did not venture to suggest that Irene should come in his car;
    it was through no good management of his own, but by the mere
    luck of Mrs. Aldwinkle’s final caprice before the actual moment of
    starting, that he did in fact find her sitting next him when at last
    they moved off from before the palace doors. At the back sat
    Mr. Falx, in solitude, surrounded by suit-cases. To him Lord
    Hovenden had even dutifully promised that he would never go more
    than five-and-twenty miles an hour. Pedestrian slavishness could
    hardly go further.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Heavily loaded, Mrs. Aldwinkle’s limousine started first. Miss
    Elver, who had begged to be granted this special favour, sat in front,
    next the chauffeur. An expression of perfect and absolute bliss
    irradiated her face. Whenever the car passed any one by the
    roadside, she made a shrill hooting noise and waved her handkerchief.
    Luckily she was unaware of the feelings of disgust and
    indignation which her conduct aroused in the chauffeur; he was
    English and enormously genteel, he had the reputation of his
    country and his impeccable car to keep up. And this person
    waved handkerchiefs and shouted as though she were on a char-à-banc.
    Miss Elver even waved at the cows and horses, she shouted
    even to the cats and the chickens.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>In the body of the car sat Mrs. Aldwinkle, Mrs. Chelifer, Chelifer
    and Mr. Cardan. Calamy and Miss Thriplow had decided that
    they had no time to go to Rome and had been left—without a
    word of objection on Mrs. Aldwinkle’s part—at the palace. The
    landscape slid placidly past the windows. Mr. Cardan and Mrs.
    Chelifer talked about traditional games.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Meanwhile, a couple of hundred yards behind, Lord Hovenden
    disgustfully sniffed the dusty air. ‘How intolerably slowly old
    Ernest drives!’ he said to his companion.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Aunt Lilian doesn’t allow him to do more than thirty miles
    an hour,’ Irene explained.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Hovenden snorted derisively. ‘Firty! But must we eat veir
    filthy dust all ve way?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Perhaps you might drop back a bit,’ Irene suggested.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Or perhaps we might pass vem?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Well .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.’ said Irene doubtfully. ‘I don’t think we ought
    to make poor Aunt Lilian eat our dust.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘She wouldn’t eat it for long, if old Ernest is only allowed to
    do firty.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Well, in that case,’ said Irene, feeling that her duty towards
    Aunt Lilian had been done, ‘in that case .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Lord Hovenden accelerated. The road was broad, flat and
    straight. There was no traffic. In two minutes Mrs. Aldwinkle
    had eaten her brief, unavoidable meal of dust; the air was clear
    again. Far off along the white road, a rapidly diminishing cloud
    was all that could be seen of Lord Hovenden’s Velox.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Well, fank God,’ Lord Hovenden was saying in a cheerful
    voice, ‘now we can get along at a reasonable rate.’ He grinned, a
    young ecstatic giant.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Irene also found the speed exhilarating. Under her grey silk
    mask, with its goggling windows for the eyes, her short lip was
    lifted in a joyful smile from the white small teeth. ‘It’s lovely,’
    she said.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I’m glad you like it,’ said Hovenden. ‘Vat’s splendid.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>But a tap on his shoulder reminded him that there was somebody
    else in the car besides Irene and himself. Mr. Falx was far from
    finding the present state of affairs splendid. Blown by the wind,
    his white beard shook and fluttered like a living thing in a state of
    mortal agitation. Behind the goggles, his dark eyes had an anxious
    look in them. ‘Aren’t you going rather fast?’ he shouted,
    leaning forward, so as to make himself heard.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Not a bit,’ Hovenden shouted back. ‘Just ve usual speed.
    Perfectly safe.’ His ordinary pedestrian self would never have
    dreamed of doing anything contrary to the wishes of the venerated
    master. But the young giant who sat at the wheel of the Velox
    cared for nobody. He went his own way.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>They passed through the sordid outskirts of Viareggio, through
    the pinewoods beyond, solemn with dark green shadow, and
    aromatic. Islanded in their grassy meadow within the battlemented
    walls, the white church, the white arcaded tower miraculously
    poised on the verge of falling, the round white baptistery
    seemed to meditate in solitude of ancient glories—Pisan dominion,
    Pisan arts and thoughts—of the mysteries of religion, of inscrutable
    fate and unfathomed godhead, of the insignificance and the grandeur
    of man.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Why ve deuce it shouldn’t fall,’ said Hovenden, as the Leaning
    Tower came in sight, ‘I can’t imagine.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>They drove past the house on the water, where Byron had bored
    himself through an eternity of months, out of the town. After
    Pontedera the road became more desolate. Through a wilderness
    of bare, unfertile hills, between whose yellowing grasses showed a
    white and ghastly soil, they mounted towards Volterra. The
    landscape took on something of an infernal aspect; a prospect of
    parched hills and waterless gulleys, like the undulations of a petrified
    ocean, expanded interminably round them. And on the crest of
    the highest wave, the capital of this strange hell, stood Volterra—three
    towers against the sky, a dome, a line of impregnable walls,
    and outside the walls, still outside but advancing ineluctably year
    by year towards them, the ravening gulf that eats its way into the
    flank of the hill, devouring the works of civilization after civilization,
    the tombs of the Etruscans, Roman villas, abbeys and mediaeval
    fortresses, renaissance churches and the houses of yesterday.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Must be a bit slow, life in a town like vis,’ said Hovenden,
    racing round the hairpin turns with an easy virtuosity that appalled
    Mr. Falx.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Think if one had been born there,’ said Irene.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Well, if we’d both been born vere,’ replied Lord Hovenden,
    flushed with insolence and speed, ‘it wouldn’t have been so bad.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>They left Volterra behind them. The hellish landscape was
    gradually tempered with mundane greenness and amenity. They
    descended the headlong street of Colle. The landscape became
    once more completely earthly. The soil of the hills was red, like
    that from which God made Adam. In the steep fields grew rows
    of little pollard trees, from whose twisted black arms hung the
    festooned vines. Here and there between the trees shuffled a pair
    of white oxen, dragging a plough.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Excellent roads, for a change,’ said Lord Hovenden. On one
    straight stretch he managed to touch eighty-eight. Mr. Falx’s
    beard writhed and fluttered with the agonized motions of some
    captive animal. He was enormously thankful when they drew
    up in front of the hotel at Siena.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Wonderful machine, don’t you fink?’ Lord Hovenden asked
    him, when they had come to a standstill.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘You go much too fast,’ said Mr. Falx severely.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Lord Hovenden’s face fell. ‘I’m awfully sorry,’ he apologized.
    The young giant in him was already giving place to the meek
    pedestrian. He looked at his watch. ‘The others won’t be here
    for another three-quarters of an hour, I should fink,’ he added, in
    the hope that Mr. Falx would be mollified by the information.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Mr. Falx was not mollified, and when the time came, after lunch,
    for setting out on the Perugia road, he expressed a decided preference
    for a seat in Mrs. Aldwinkle’s limousine. It was decided that
    he should change places with Miss Elver.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Miss Elver had no objection to speed; indeed, it excited her.
    The faster they went, the more piercing became her cries of greeting
    and farewell, the more wildly she waved her handkerchief at the
    passing dogs and children. The only trouble about going so fast
    was that the mighty wind was always tearing the handkerchiefs
    from between her fingers and whirling them irretrievably into
    receding space. When all the four handkerchiefs in her reticule
    had been blown away, Miss Elver burst into tears. Lord Hovenden
    had to stop and lend her his coloured silk bandana. Miss
    Elver was enchanted by its gaudy beauty; to secure it against the
    assaults of the thievish wind, she made Irene tie one corner of it
    round her wrist.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Now it’ll be all right,’ she said triumphantly; lifting her
    goggles, she wiped away the last traces of her recent grief.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Lord Hovenden set off again. On the sky-line, lifted high above
    the rolling table-land over which they were travelling, the solitary
    blue shape of Monte Amiata beckoned from far away. With
    every mile to southward the horns of the white oxen that dragged
    the carts became longer and longer. A sneeze—one ran the risk
    of a puncture; a sideways toss of the head—one might have been
    impaled on the hard and polished points. They passed through
    San Quirico; from that secret and melancholy garden within the
    walls of the ruined citadel came a whiff of sun-warmed box. In
    Pienza they found the Platonic idea of a city, the town with a
    capital T; walls with a gate in them, a short street, a piazza with a
    cathedral and palaces round the other three sides, another short
    street, another gate and then the fields, rich with corn, wine and
    oil; and the tall blue peak of Monte Amiata looking down across
    the fertile land. At Montepulciano there were more palaces and
    more churches; but the intellectual beauty of symmetry was
    replaced by a picturesque and precipitous confusion.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Gosh!’ said Lord Hovenden expressively, as they slid with
    locked wheels down a high street that had been planned for pack-asses
    and mules. From pedimented windows between the pilasters
    of the palaces, curious faces peered out at them. They tobogganed
    down, through the high renaissance, out of an arch of the Middle
    Ages, into the dateless and eternal fields. From Montepulciano
    they descended on to Lake Trasimene.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Wasn’t there a battle here, or something?’ asked Irene, when
    she saw the name on the map.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Lord Hovenden seemed to remember that there had indeed been
    something of the kind in this neighbourhood. ‘But it doesn’t
    make much difference, does it?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Irene nodded; it certainly didn’t seem to make much difference.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Nofing makes any difference,’ said Lord Hovenden, making
    himself heard with difficulty in the teeth of a wind which his speedometer
    registered as blowing at forty-five miles an hour. ‘Except’—the
    wind made him bold—‘except you.’ And he added
    hastily, in case Irene might try to be severe. ‘Such a bore going
    down-hill on a twiddly road like vis. One can’t risk ve slightest
    speed.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>But when they turned into the flat highway along the western
    shore of the lake, his face brightened. ‘Vis is more like it,’ he
    said. The wind in their faces increased from a capful to half a
    gale, from half a gale to a full gale, from a full gale very nearly to
    a hurricane. Lord Hovenden’s spirits rose with the mounting
    speed. His lips curved themselves into a smile of fixed and
    permanent rapture. Behind the glass of his goggles his eyes were
    very bright. ‘Pretty good going,’ he said.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Pretty good,’ echoed Irene. Under her mask, she too was
    smiling. Between her ears and the flaps of her leather cap the
    wind made a glorious roaring. She was happy.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>The road swung round to the left following the southern shore
    of the lake.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘We shall soon be at Perugia,’ said Hovenden regretfully.
    ‘What a bore!’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>And Irene, though she said nothing, inwardly agreed with him.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>They rushed on, the gale blew steadily in their faces. The
    road forked; Lord Hovenden turned the nose of his machine along
    the leftward branch. They lost sight of the blue water.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Good-bye, Trasimene,’ said Irene regretfully. It was a lovely
    lake; she wished she could remember what had happened
    there.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>The road began to climb and twist; the wind abated to a mere
    half-gale. From the top of the hill, Irene was surprised to see the
    blue waters, which she had just taken leave of for ever, sparkling
    two or three hundred feet below on the left. At the joyous sight
    Miss Elver clapped her hands and shouted.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Hullo,’ Irene said, surprised. ‘That’s odd, isn’t it?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Taken ve wrong road,’ Hovenden explained. ‘We’re going
    norf again up ve east side of ve lake. We’ll go right round. It’s
    too much bore to stop and turn.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>They rushed on. For a long time neither of them spoke.
    Behind them Miss Elver hooted her greetings to every living
    creature on the road.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>They were filled with happiness and joy; they would have liked
    to go on like this for ever. They rushed on. On the north shore
    of the lake the road straightened itself out and became flat again.
    The wind freshened. Far off on their respective hills Cortona
    and Montepulciano moved slowly, as they rushed along, like fixed
    stars. And now they were on the west shore once more. Perched
    on its jutting peninsula Castiglione del Lago reflected itself complacently
    in the water. ‘Pretty good,’ shouted Lord Hovenden
    in the teeth of the hurricane. ‘By the way,’ he added, ‘wasn’t
    it Hannibal or somebody who had a battle here? Wiv elephants,
    or somefing.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Perhaps it was,’ said Irene.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Not vat it matters in ve least.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Not in the least.’ She laughed under her mask.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Hovenden laughed too. He was happy, he was joyful, he was
    daring.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Would you marry me if I asked you?’ he said. The question
    followed naturally and by a kind of logic from what they had been
    saying about Hannibal and his elephants. He did not look at her
    as he asked the question; when one is doing sixty-seven one must
    keep one’s eyes on the road.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Don’t talk nonsense,’ said Irene.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I’m not talking nonsense,’ Lord Hovenden protested. ‘I’m
    asking a straightforward question. Would you marry me?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘No.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Why not?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I don’t know,’ said Irene.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>They had passed Castiglione. The fixed stars of Montepulciano
    and Cortona had set behind them.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Don’t you like me?’ shouted Lord Hovenden. The wind
    had swelled into a hurricane.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘You know I do.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Ven why not?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Because, because .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Oh, I don’t know. I wish you’d stop
    talking about it.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>The machine rushed on. Once more they were running along
    the southern shore. A hundred yards before the forking of the
    roads, Lord Hovenden broke silence. ‘Will you marry me?’
    he asked.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘No,’ said Irene.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Lord Hovenden turned the nose of his machine to the left. The
    road climbed and twisted, the wind of their speed abated.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Stop,’ said Irene. ‘You’ve taken the wrong turn again.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>But Hovenden did not stop. Instead, he pressed down the
    accelerator. If the car got round the corners it was more by a
    miracle than in obedience to the laws of Newton or of nature.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Stop!’ cried Irene again. But the car went on.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>From the hill-top they looked down once more upon the
    lake.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Will you marry me?’ Lord Hovenden asked again. His eyes
    were fixed on the road in front of him. Rapturously, triumphantly
    he smiled. He had never felt happier, never more daring, more
    overflowing with strength and power. ‘Will you marry me?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘No,’ said Irene. She felt annoyed; how stupidly he was
    behaving!</p>

    <p class='pindent'>They were silent for several minutes. At Castiglione del
    Lago he asked again. Irene repeated her answer.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘You’re not going to do this clown’s trick again, are you?’
    she asked as they approached the bifurcation of the roads.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘It depends if you’re going to marry me,’ he answered. This
    time he laughed aloud; so infectiously that Irene, whose irritation
    was something laid on superficially over her happiness, could not
    help laughing too. ‘<span class='it'>Are</span> you going to?’ he asked.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘No.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Lord Hovenden turned to the left. ‘It’ll be late before we get
    to Perugia,’ he said.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Oo-ooh!’ cried Miss Elver, as they topped the long hill.
    ‘How lovely!’ She clapped her hands. Then, leaning forward,
    she touched Irene’s shoulder. ‘What a lot of lakes there are here!’
    she said.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>On the north shore Lord Hovenden asked again. Cortona and
    Montepulciano presided at the asking.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I don’t see why I should be bullied,’ said Irene. Lord
    Hovenden found the answer more promising than those which had
    gone before.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘But you’re not being bullied.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I am,’ she insisted. ‘You’re trying to force me to answer
    all at once, without thinking.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Now really,’ said Hovenden, ‘I call vat a bit fick. Forcing
    you to answer all at once! But vat’s exactly what I’m not doing.
    I’m giving you time. We’ll go round ve lake all night, if you
    like.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>A quarter of a mile from the forking of the road, he put the
    question yet once more.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘You’re a beast,’ said Irene.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Vat’s not an answer.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I don’t want to answer.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘You needn’t answer definitely if you don’t want to,’ he conceded.
    ‘I only want you to say vat you’ll fink of it. Just say
    perhaps.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I don’t want to,’ Irene insisted. They were very close, now,
    to the dividing of ways.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Just perhaps. Just say you’ll fink of it.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Well, I’ll think,’ said Irene. ‘But mind, it doesn’t
    commit .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>She did not finish her sentence; for the car, which had been
    heading towards the left, swerved suddenly to the right with such
    violence that Irene had to clutch at the arm of her seat to prevent
    herself from being thrown sideways bodily out of the machine.
    ‘Goodness!’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘It’s all right,’ said Lord Hovenden. They were running
    smoothly now along the right-hand road. Ten minutes later,
    from the crest of a little pass, they saw Perugia on its mountain,
    glittering in the sunlight. They found, when they reached the
    hotel, that the rest of the party had long since arrived.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘We took ve wrong turning,’ Lord Hovenden explained. ‘By
    ve way,’ he added, turning to Mr. Cardan, ‘about vat lake we passed—wasn’t
    it Hannibal or some one .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Such a lot of lakes,’ Miss Elver was telling Mrs. Chelifer.
    ‘Such a lot!’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Only one, surely, my dear,’ Mrs. Chelifer mildly insisted.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>But Miss Elver wouldn’t hear of it. ‘Lots and lots.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Mrs. Chelifer sighed compassionately.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Before dinner Irene and Lord Hovenden went for a stroll in the
    town. The huge stone palaces lowered down at them as they
    passed. The sun was so low that only their highest windows, their
    roofs and cornices took the light. The world’s grey shadow was
    creeping up their flanks; but their crests were tipped with coral
    and ruddy gold.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I like vis place,’ said Lord Hovenden. In the circumstances
    he would have liked Wigan or Pittsburg.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘So do I,’ said Irene. Through the window in her thick hair
    her face looked smiling out, merry in its childishness.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Leaving the stately part of the town, they plunged into the
    labyrinth of steep alleys, of winding passage-ways and staircases
    behind the cathedral. Built confusedly on the hill-side, the tall
    houses seemed to grow into one another, as though they were the
    component parts of one immense and fantastical building, in which
    the alleys served as corridors. The road would burrow through
    the houses in a long dark tunnel, to widen out into a little well-like
    courtyard, open to the sky. Through open doors, at the head of
    an outside staircase, one saw in the bright electric light a family
    sitting round the soup tureen. The road turned into a flight of
    stairs, dipped into another tunnel, made cheerful by the lights of
    a subterranean wine shop opening into it. From the mouth of the
    bright cavern came up the smell of liquor, the sound of loud voices
    and reverberated laughter.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>And then, suddenly emerging from under the high houses, they
    found themselves standing on the edge of an escarped slope, looking
    out on to a huge expanse of pale evening sky, scalloped at its fringes
    by the blue shapes of mountains, with the round moon, already
    bright, hanging serene and solemn in the midst. Leaning over
    the parapet, they looked down at the roofs of another quarter of the
    city, a hundred feet below. The colours of the world still struggled
    against the encroaching darkness; but a lavish municipality had
    already beaded the streets with yellow lights. A faint smell of
    wood-smoke and frying came up through the thin pure air. The
    silence of the sky was so capacious, so high and wide, that the noises
    of the town—like so many small, distinctly seen objects in the
    midst of an immense blank prairie—served but to intensify the
    quiet, to make the listener more conscious of its immensity in
    comparison with the trivial clatter at its heart.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I like vis place,’ Lord Hovenden repeated.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>They stood for a long time, leaning their elbows on the parapet,
    saying nothing.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I say,’ said Hovenden suddenly, turning towards his companion
    a face on which all the shyness, the pedestrian’s self-deprecation
    had reappeared, ‘I’m most awfully sorry about vat silly business
    of going round vat beastly lake.’ The young giant who sat at the
    wheel of the Vauxhall Velox had retired with the machine into the
    garage, leaving a much less formidable Hovenden to prosecute the
    campaign which he had so masterfully begun. The moon, the
    enchanting beauty of the face that looked out so pensively through
    its tress-framed window, the enormous silence with the little
    irrelevant noises at its heart, the smell of wood-smoke and fried veal
    cutlets—all these influences had conspired to mollify Lord Hovenden’s
    joyous elation into a soft and sugary melancholy. His
    actions of this afternoon seemed to him now, in his changed mood,
    reprehensibly violent. He was afraid that his brutality might
    have ruined his cause. Could she ever forgive him for such
    behaviour? He was overwhelmed by self-reproach. To beg
    forgiveness seemed to be his only hope. ‘I’m awfully sorry.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Are you?’ Irene turned and smiled at him. Her small white
    teeth showed beneath the lifted lip; in the wide-set, childish eyes
    there was a shining happiness. ‘I’m not. I didn’t mind a bit.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Lord Hovenden took her hand. ‘You didn’t mind? Not at
    all?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>She shook her head. ‘You remember that day under the olive
    trees?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I was a beast,’ he whispered remorsefully.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I was a goose,’ said Irene. ‘But I feel different now.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘You don’t mean .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>She nodded. They walked back to their hotel hand in hand.
    Hovenden never stopped talking and laughing all the way. Irene
    was silent. The kiss had made her happy too, but in a different way.</p>

    <h2>CHAPTER II</h2>

    <p class='pindent'>Time and space, matter and mind, subject, object—how inextricably
    they got mixed, next day, on the road to Rome! The
    simple-minded traveller who imagines himself to be driving quietly
    through Umbria and Latium finds himself at the same time dizzily
    switchbacking up and down the periods of history, rolling on top
    gear through systems of political economy, scaling heights of
    philosophy and religion, whizzing from aesthetic to aesthetic.
    Dimensions are bewilderingly multiplied, and the machine which
    seems to be rolling so smoothly over the roads is travelling, in reality,
    as fast as forty horses and the human minds on board can take it,
    down a score of other roads, simultaneously, in all directions.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>The morning was bright when they left Perugia. In the blue
    sky above Subasio floated a few large white clouds. Silently they
    rolled away down the winding hill. At the foot of the mountain,
    secure from the sunlight in the delicious cool of their family vault,
    the obese Volumni reclined along the lids of their marble ashbins,
    as though on couches round the dinner-table. In an eternal
    anticipation of the next succulent course they smiled and for ever
    went on smiling. We enjoyed life, they seemed to say, and
    considered death without horror. The thought of death was the
    seasoning which made our five and twenty thousand dinners upon
    this earth yet more appetizing.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>A few miles further on, at Assisi, the mummy of a she-saint lies
    in a glass case, brilliantly illumined by concealed electric lights.
    Think of death, says the she-saint, ponder incessantly on the decay
    of all things, the transience of this sublunary life. Think, think;
    and in the end life itself will lose all its savour; death will corrupt
    it; the flesh will seem a shame and a disgustfulness. Think of
    death hard enough and you will come to deny the beauty and the
    holiness of life; and, in point of fact, the mummy was once a nun.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘When Goethe came to Assisi,’ said Mr. Cardan, as they emerged
    from the vaults of St. Clare, ‘the only thing he looked at was the
    portico of a second-rate Roman temple. Perhaps he wasn’t such a
    fool as we think him.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘An admirable place for playing halma,’ said Chelifer, as they
    entered the Teatro Metastasio.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Upon that rococo stage art was intended to worship itself.
    Everywhere now, for the last two hundred years and more, it has
    been worshipping itself.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>But in the upper and the lower churches of St. Francis, Giotto
    and Cimabue showed that art had once worshipped something other
    than itself. Art there is the handmaid of religion—or, as the
    psycho-analysts would say, more scientifically, anal-erotism is a
    frequent concomitant of incestuous homosexuality.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I wonder,’ said Mr. Cardan pensively, ‘if St. Francis really
    managed to make poverty seem so dignified, charming and attractive
    as they make out. I know very few poor people nowadays who
    cut a particularly graceful figure.’ He looked at Miss Elver, who
    was waddling along the road like a water-bird on land, a few yards
    ahead. The end of one of Lord Hovenden’s bright bandanas
    trailed behind her in the dust; it was tied by one corner to her
    wrist and she had forgotten its existence. Twenty-five thousand
    pounds, thought Mr. Cardan, and sighed. St. Francis, Gotama
    Buddha—they managed their affairs rather differently. But it
    was difficult nowadays to beg with any degree of dignity.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>They got into the cars once more; waving the red bandana,
    Miss Elver said good-bye to the saints who thought so much of
    death that they were forced to mortify their lives. In their cool
    summer-house the obese Volumni smiled contemptuously. We
    thought not of death, we begat children, multiplied our flocks, added
    acre to acre, glorified life.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Lord Hovenden accelerated; the
    two wisdoms, the new and the ancient law, receded into the distance.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Spello came tumbling down the hill to look at them. In Foligno
    it was market day. There were so many people that Miss Elver
    exhausted herself in continuous wavings and greetings. Trevi on
    its conical mountain was like the picture of a city in an illuminated
    book. By the side of the road, in the rich plain, stood factories;
    their tall chimneys were the slenderer repetitions of the castle
    towers perched high on the slopes of the hills above. In these
    secure and civilized times the robbers come down from their
    mountain fastnesses and build their watch-towers in the valleys.
    They were driving through progress; through progress at a mile a
    minute. And suddenly the cool and sparkling miracle of Clitumnus
    was at their right hand. The sacred spring came rushing out of the
    flank of the hill into a brimming pool. The banks were green with
    an almost English grass. There were green islands in the midst;
    and the weeping willow trees drooping over the water, the little
    bridges, transformed the Roman site into the original landscape from
    which a Chinese artist first drew a willow pattern.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘More lakes,’ cried Miss Elver.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>At Spoleto they stopped for lunch and the frescoes of Filippo
    Lippi, a painter Mrs. Aldwinkle particularly admired for having
    had the strength of mind, though a friar, to run off with a young
    girl at a Convent School. The shadowy apse was melodious with
    pious and elegant shapes and clear, pure colours. Anal-erotism
    was still the handmaid of incestuous homosexuality, but not exclusively.
    There was more than a hint in these bright forms of anal-erotism
    for anal-erotism’s sake. But the designer of that more than
    Roman <span class='it'>cinquecento</span> narthex at the west end of the church, he surely
    was a pure and unmixed coprophilite. How charming is divine
    philosophy! Astrology, alchemy, phrenology and animal magnetism,
    the N-rays, ectoplasm and the calculating horses of Elberfield—these
    have had their turn and passed. We need not regret them;
    for we can boast of a science as richly popular, as easy and as all-explanatory
    as ever were phrenology or magic. Gall and Mesmer
    have given place to Freud. Filippo Lippi once had a bump of art.
    He is now an incestuous homosexualist with a bent towards anal-erotism.
    Can we doubt any longer that human intelligence progresses
    and grows greater? Fifty years hence, what will be the
    current explanation of Filippo Lippi? Something profounder,
    something more fundamental even than faeces and infantile incestuousness;
    of that we may be certain. But what, precisely
    what, God alone knows. How charming is divine philosophy!</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I like vese paintings,’ Lord Hovenden whispered to Irene.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>They set out again. Over the pass of the Somma, down the
    long winding gorge to Terni.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>On across the plain (the mountains bristling jaggedly all round)
    and up the hill to Narni; Narni that hangs precariously on the
    brink of its deep precipitous valley; on into the Sabine hills.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Sabine, Sabine—how wildly the mere word deviated the machine
    from its course! <span class='it'>Eheu, fugaces</span>, how the days draw in—was not
    that first said, first elegantly and compellingly said, in a Sabine farm?
    And the Sabine women! Only Rubens knew what they looked like
    and how they ought to be raped. How large and blonde they were!
    What glossy satin dresses they had on, what pearls! And their
    Roman ravishers were tanned as brown as Indians. Their muscles
    bulged; their eyes, their polished armour flashed. From the backs
    of their prancing horses they fairly dived into the foaming sea of
    female flesh that splashed and wildly undulated around them. The
    very architecture became tumultuous and orgiastic. Those were
    the high old times. Climbing from Narni, they drove into the
    heart of them.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>But other artists than Peter Paul had passed this way. He
    painted only the Sabine name; they, the scene. An ancient
    shepherd, strayed from one of Piranesi’s ruins, watched them from
    a rock above the road, leaning on his staff. A flock of goats, kneeling
    ruminatively in the shade of an oak tree, their black bearded
    faces, their twisted horns sharply outlined against the bright blue
    sky, grouped themselves professionally—good beasts! they had
    studied the art of pictorial composition under the best masters—in
    momentary expectation of Rosa da Tivoli’s arrival. And the
    same Italianizing Dutchman was surely responsible for that flock
    of dusty sheep, those dogs, those lads with staves and that burly
    master shepherd, dressed like a capripede in goatskin breeches and
    mounted on the back of a little donkey, whose smallness contributed
    by contrast to the portly dignity of its rider. Nor were Dutchmen
    and Flemings the only foreign painters in this Italian scene. There
    were trees, there were glades in the woods, there were rocks that
    belonged by right of conquest to Nicolas Poussin. Half close the
    eyes, and that grey stone becomes a ruined sepulchre: <span class='it'>Et ego in
    Arcadia</span> .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.; the village there, on the hill-top, across the valley,
    flowers into a little city of colonnades and cupolas and triumphal
    arches, and the peasants working in the fields are the people of a
    transcendental Arcadia gravely and soberly engaged in pursuing the
    True, the rationally Good and Beautiful. So much for the foreground
    and the middle distance. But suddenly, from the crest
    of a long descent, the remote wide background of Poussin’s ideal
    world revealed itself: the vale of the Tiber, the broken plain of
    the Campagna, and in the midst—fantastic, improbable—the solitary
    cone of Mount Soracte, dim and blue against the blue of the sky.</p>

    <h2>CHAPTER III</h2>

    <p class='pindent'>From the heights of the Pincio Mr. Falx denounced the city
    that lay spread out below him.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Marvellous, isn’t it?’ Mrs. Aldwinkle had said. Rome was
    one of her private properties.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘But every stone of it,’ said Mr. Falx, ‘raised by slave labour.
    Every stone! Millions of wretches have sweated and toiled and
    died’—Mr. Falx’s voice rose, his language became richer and
    richer, he gesticulated as though he were addressing a public
    meeting—‘in order that these palaces, these stately churches, these
    forums, amphitheatres, cloaca maximas and what-nots might be
    here to-day to gratify your idle eyes. Is it worth it, I ask you?
    Is the momentary gratification of a few idlers a sufficient reason
    for the secular oppression of millions of human beings, their
    brothers, their equals in the eyes of God? Is it, I ask again?
    No, a thousand times no.’ With his right fist Mr. Falx thumped
    the open palm of his left hand. ‘No!’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘But you forget,’ said Mr. Cardan, ‘there’s such a thing as a
    natural hierarchy.’ The words seemed to remind him of something.
    He looked round. At one of the little tea-tables grouped round the
    band-stand at the other side of the road, Miss Elver, dressed in
    her sack of flowered upholstery, was eating chocolate éclairs and
    meringues, messily, with an expression of rapture on her cream-smeared
    face. Mr. Cardan turned back and continued: ‘There
    are a few choice Britons who never never will be slaves, and a great
    many who not only will be slaves, but would be utterly lost if they
    were made free. Isn’t it so?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Specious,’ said Mr. Falx severely. ‘But does the argument
    justify you in grinding the life out of a million human beings for
    the sake of a few works of art? How many thousand workmen
    and their wives and children lived degraded lives in order that
    St. Peter’s might be what it is?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Well, as a matter of fact, St. Peter’s isn’t much of a work of
    art,’ said Mrs. Aldwinkle scornfully, feeling that she had scored
    a decided point in the argument.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘If it’s a question of degraded lives,’ put in Chelifer, ‘let me
    make a claim for the middle classes rather than the workers.
    Materially, perhaps, they may live a little better; but morally and
    spiritually, I assure you, they stand at the very heart of reality.
    Intellectually, of course, they are indistinguishable from the
    workers. All but a negligible, freakish minority in both classes
    belong to the three lowest Galtonian categories. But morally
    and spiritually they are worse off; they suffer from a greater
    reverence for public opinion, they are tortured by snobbery, they
    live perpetually in the midst of fear and hate. For if the workers
    are afraid of losing their jobs, so too are the burgesses, and with
    almost better reason—for they have more to lose, have further to
    fall. They fall from a precarious heaven of gentility into the
    abysses of unrelieved poverty, into the workhouse and the glutted
    labour exchanges; can you wonder that they live in fear? And
    as for hate—you can talk about the hate of the proletariat for the
    bourgeoisie, but it’s nothing, I assure you, to the hate that the
    bourgeoisie feel for the proletariat. Your burgess loathes the
    worker because he is afraid of him; he is terrified of the revolution
    that may pull him down from his genteel heaven into hell. How
    enviously, with what a bitter resentment, your burgess regards the
    slightest amelioration of the worker’s existence! To him it always
    seems an amelioration made at his expense. Do you remember,
    during the war and in the prosperous time immediately following,
    when the workers for the first time in history were paid a wage
    that enabled them to live in something like comfort, do you remember
    how furiously, with what a black atrabilious overflow of
    hatred, the middle classes denounced the riotous excesses of the
    idle poor? Why, the monsters even bought pianos—pianos!
    The pianos have all been sold again, long since. The spare furniture
    has gone the way of all superfluities. Even the winter overcoat
    is pawned. The burgess, for all that the times are hard for him too,
    feels happier; he is revenged. He can live in a comparative
    tranquillity. And what a life! He lives according to his lusts,
    but timorously and in a conventional way; his diversions are
    provided for him by joint stock companies. He has no religion,
    but a great respect for genteel conventions which have not even
    the justification of a divine origin. He has heard of art and
    thought, and respects them because the best people respect them;
    but his mental capacities and his lack of education do not allow him
    to get any real satisfaction out of them. He is thus poorer than the
    savage, who, if he has never heard of art or science, is yet rich in
    religion and traditional lore. The life of a wild animal has a
    certain dignity and beauty; it is only the life of a domesticated
    animal that can be called degraded. The burgess is the perfectly
    domesticated human animal. That is why,’ added Chelifer, ‘that
    is why any one who wants to live really at the heart of human reality
    must live in the midst of burgessdom. In a little while, however,
    it won’t be necessary to make any invidious distinctions between
    the classes. Every one will soon be bourgeois. The charm of the
    lower classes in the past consisted in the fact that they were composed
    of human animals in a state of relative wildness. They had a
    traditional wisdom and a traditional superstition; they had ancient
    and symbolical diversions of their own. My mother can tell you
    all about those,’ he put in parenthetically. ‘That Tolstoy should
    have preferred the Russian peasants to his rich and literary friends
    is very comprehensible. The peasants were wild; the others,
    just as brutish at bottom, were disgustingly tame. Moreover,
    they were lap-dogs of a perfectly useless breed; the peasants at any
    rate did something to justify their existence. But in the other
    countries of Europe and the New World the wild breed is rapidly
    dying out. Million-sale newspapers and radios are domesticating
    them at a prodigious rate. You can go a long way in England
    nowadays before you find a genuine wild human animal. Still,
    they do exist in the country and even in the more fetid and savage
    parts of towns. That’s why, I repeat, one must live among the
    suburban bourgeoisie. The degraded and domesticated are the
    typical human animals of the present time; it’s they who will
    inherit the earth in the next generation; they’re the characteristic
    modern reality. The wild ones are no longer typical; it would
    be ludicrous to be a Tolstoyan now, in western Europe. And as
    for the genuine men and women, as opposed to the human animals,
    whether wild or tame—they’re so fabulously exceptional that one
    has no right to think of them at all. That cupola,’ he pointed to
    the silhouette of St. Peter’s, rising high above the houses on the
    other side of the city, ‘was designed by Michelangelo. And very
    nice too. But what has it or he to do with us?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Blasphemy!’ cried Mrs. Aldwinkle, flying to the defence of
    Buonarroti.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Mr. Falx harked back to an earlier grievance. ‘You malign
    human nature,’ he said.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘All very true and indeed obvious,’ was Mr. Cardan’s comment.
    ‘But I can’t see why you shouldn’t allow us to amuse ourselves with
    Michelangelo if we want to. God knows, it’s hard enough for a
    man to adapt himself to circumstances; why should you deprive
    him of his little assistants in the difficult task? Wine, for example,
    learning, cigars and conversation, art, cooking, religion for those
    that like it, sport, love, humanitarianism, hashish and all the rest.
    Every man has his own recipe for facilitating the process of adaptation.
    Why shouldn’t he be allowed to indulge in his dope in peace?
    You young men are all so damned intolerant. How often have I
    had occasion to say it? You’re nothing but a set of prohibitionists,
    the whole lot of you.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Still,’ said Mrs. Chelifer in her gentle and musical voice,
    ‘you can’t deny that prohibition has done a great deal of good in
    America.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>They strolled back to the tea-table, which they had left a few
    minutes before to look at the view. Miss Elver was just finishing
    an éclair. Two empty dishes stood in front of her.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Had a good tea?’ asked Mr. Cardan.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Miss Elver nodded; her mouth was too full to speak.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Perhaps you’d like some more cakes?’ he suggested.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Miss Elver looked at the two empty dishes, then at Mr. Cardan.
    She seemed on the point of saying yes. But Mrs. Chelifer, who had
    taken the chair next hers, laid a hand on her arm.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I don’t think Grace really wants any more,’ she said.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Grace turned towards her; a look of disappointment and
    melancholy came into her eyes, but it gave place after a moment
    to a happier expression. She smiled, she took Mrs. Chelifer’s
    hand and kissed it.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I like you,’ she said.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>On the back of Mrs. Chelifer’s hand her lips had left a brown
    print of melted chocolate. ‘I think you’d better just give your
    face a little wipe with your napkin,’ Mrs. Chelifer suggested.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Perhaps if you dipped the corner of it first into the hot
    water .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>There was a silence. From the open-air dancing-floor, a
    hundred yards away beneath the trees, came the sound, a little
    dimmed by the intervening distance and the pervading Roman
    noise, of the jazz band. Monotonously, unceasingly, the banjos
    throbbed out the dance rhythms. An occasional squeak indicated
    the presence of a violin. The trumpet could be heard tooting
    away with a dreary persistence at the tonic and dominant; and
    clear above all the rest the saxophone voluptuously caterwauled.
    At this distance every tune sounded exactly the same. Suddenly,
    from the band-stand of the tea-garden a pianist, two fiddlers and a
    ’cellist began to play the Pilgrims’ Chorus out of <span class='it'>Tannhäuser</span>.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Irene and Lord Hovenden, locked in one another’s arms, were
    stepping lightly, meanwhile, lightly and accurately over the concrete
    dance-floor. Obedient to the music of the jazz band, forty
    other couples stepped lightly round them. Percolating insidiously
    through the palisade that separated the dance-floor from the rest
    of the world, thin wafts of the Pilgrims’ Chorus intruded faintly
    upon the jazz.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Listen,’ said Hovenden. Dancing, they listened. ‘Funny
    it sounds when you hear bof at ve same time!’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>But the music from beyond the palisade was not strong enough
    to spoil their rhythm. They listened for a little, smiling at the
    absurdity of this other music from outside; but they danced on
    uninterruptedly. After a time they did not even take the trouble
    to listen.</p>

    <h2>CHAPTER IV</h2>

    <p class='pindent'>Mr. Falx had expected to find no difficulty, once they were
    arrived in Rome, in recalling his pupil to what he considered
    a better and more serious frame of mind. In the bracing atmosphere
    of an International Labour Conference Lord Hovenden, he
    hoped, would recover his moral and intellectual tone. Listening to
    speeches, meeting foreign comrades, he would forget the corrupting
    charms of life under Mrs. Aldwinkle’s roof and turn to nobler and
    more important things. Moreover, on a young and generous spirit
    like his the prospect of possible persecution at the hands of the
    Fascists might be expected to act as a stimulant; the fact of being
    in opposition ought to make him feel the more ardently for the
    unpopular cause. So Mr. Falx calculated.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>But it turned out in the event that he had calculated badly.
    Arrived in Rome, Lord Hovenden seemed to take even less interest
    in advanced politics than he had during the last two or three weeks
    at Vezza. He suffered himself, but with a reluctance that was
    only too obvious to Mr. Falx, to be taken to a few of the meetings
    of the conference. Their bracing intellectual atmosphere had no
    tonic effect upon him whatsoever, and he spent his time at the
    meetings yawning and looking with an extraordinary frequency
    at his watch. In the evenings, when Mr. Falx wanted to take him
    to see some distinguished comrade, Lord Hovenden either made
    some vague excuse or, more frequently, was simply undiscoverable.
    The next day Mr. Falx learned with distress that he had
    passed half the night at a Dancing Club with Irene Aldwinkle.
    He could only look forward hopefully to the date of Mrs.
    Aldwinkle’s return journey. Lord Hovenden—it had been
    arranged before they left England—would stay on with him in
    Rome till the end of the conference. With the removal of all
    temptations to frivolity he might be relied upon to re-become his
    better self.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Lord Hovenden’s conscience, meanwhile, occasionally troubled
    him.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I sometimes feel I’ve raver left old Mr. Falx in ve lurch,’ he
    confided uneasily to Irene on the evening of their second day in
    Rome. ‘But still, he can’t really expect me to spend all ve day
    wiv him, can he?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Irene agreed that he really couldn’t.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Besides,’ Lord Hovenden went on, reassuring himself, ‘I’d
    really be raver out of it wiv his friends. And it’s not as if he were
    lonely. Vere’s such a lot of people he wants to talk to. And,
    you know, I fink I’d really be in ve way more van anyfing.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Irene nodded. The band struck up again. Simultaneously the
    two young people got up and, united, stepped off on to the floor. It
    was a sordid and flashy cabaret, frequented by the worst sort of international
    and Italian public. The women were mostly prostitutes;
    a party of loud and tipsy young Englishmen and Americans were
    sitting in one corner with a pair of swarthy young natives who looked
    altogether too sober; the couples who took the floor danced with
    an excessive intimacy. Irene and Lord Hovenden were discussing
    the date of their wedding; they thought the cabaret delightful.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>In the day-time, when Hovenden could get off going to the
    conferences, they wandered about the town buying what they
    imagined to be antiques for their future home. The process was
    a little superfluous. For, absorbed in the delights of shopping,
    they forgot that their future home was also a highly ancestral
    home.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Vat looks an awfully nice dinner-service,’ Lord Hovenden
    would say; and darting into the shop they would buy it out of
    hand. ‘A bit chipped’—he shook his head. ‘But never mind.’
    Among the twenty-three valuable dinner-services with which their
    future home was already supplied was one of solid gold and one of
    silver gilt for less important occasions. Still, it was such fun
    buying, such fun to poke about in the shops! Under the pale blue
    sky of autumn the city was golden and black—golden where the
    sunlight fell on walls of stucco or travertine, black in the shadows,
    deeply black under archways, within the doors of churches, glossily
    black where the sculptured stone of fountains shone wet with the
    unceasing gush of water. In the open places the sun was hot;
    but a little wind from the sea blew freshly, and from the mouth of
    narrow alleys, sun-proof these thousand years, there breathed forth
    wafts of a delicious vault-like coolness. They walked for hours
    without feeling tired.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Mrs. Aldwinkle meanwhile went the round of the sights with
    Chelifer. She had hopes that the Sistine Chapel, the Appian Way
    at sunset, the Coliseum by moonlight, the gardens of the Villa
    d’Este might arouse in Chelifer’s mind emotions which should in
    their turn predispose him to feel romantically towards herself. The
    various emotions, she knew by experience, are not boxed off from
    one another in separate pigeon-holes; and when one is stimulated
    it is likely that its neighbours will also be aroused. More proposals
    are made in the taxi, on the way home from a Wagner opera, in
    the face of an impressive view, within the labyrinth of a ruined
    palace, than in drab parlours or the streets of West Kensington.
    But the Appian Way, even when the solitary pine trees were black
    against the sunset and the ghosts were playing oboes, not for the
    sensual ear, in the ruined sepulchres; the Coliseum, even under
    the moon; the cypresses, the cascades and the jade-green pools
    of Tivoli—all were ineffective. Chelifer never committed himself;
    his behaviour remained perfectly courteous.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Seated on a fallen column in the ruins of Hadrian’s Villa,
    Mrs. Aldwinkle even went so far as to tell him about certain
    amorous passages in her past life. She told him, with various little
    modifications of the facts, modifications in which she herself had
    long ago come implicitly to believe, the story of the affair with
    Elzevir, the pianist—such an artist! to his finger-tips; with Lord
    Trunion—such a <span class='it'>grand seigneur</span> of the old school! But concerning
    Mr. Cardan she was silent. It was not that Mrs. Aldwinkle’s
    mythopoeic faculties were not equal to making something very
    extraordinary and romantic out of Mr. Cardan. No, no; she had
    often described the man to those who did not know him; he was a
    sort of village Hampden, a mute inglorious What’s-his-name, who
    might have done anything—but anything—if he had chosen to give
    himself the trouble. He was a great Don Juan, actual in this case,
    not merely potential. He was a mocking devil’s advocate, he was
    even a devil. But that was because he was misunderstood—misunderstood
    by everybody but Mrs. Aldwinkle herself. Secretly
    he was so sensitive and kind-hearted. But one had to be gifted
    with intuition to find it out. And so on; she had made a capital
    mythical figure out of him. But an instinct of caution restrained
    her from showing off her myths too freely before people who were
    well acquainted with the originals. Chelifer had never met Lord
    Trunion or the immortal Elzevir. He <span class='it'>had</span> met Mr. Cardan.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>But the effect of the confidences was as small as that of the
    romantic scenery and the stupendous works of art. Chelifer was
    not encouraged by them either to confide in return or to follow the
    example of Elzevir and Lord Trunion. He listened attentively,
    gave vent, when she had finished, to a few well-chosen expressions
    of sympathy, such as one writes to acquaintances on the deaths of
    their aged grandmothers, and after a considerable silence, looking
    at his watch, said he thought it was time to be getting back: he had
    promised to meet his mother for tea, and after tea, he added, he was
    going to take her to look at <span class='it'>pensions</span>. Seeing that she was going to
    stay in Rome the whole winter, it was worth taking some trouble
    about finding a nice room. Wasn’t it? Mrs. Aldwinkle was
    forced to agree. They set off through the parched Campagna
    towards the city. Mrs. Aldwinkle preserved a melancholy silence
    all the way.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>On their way from the hotel to the tea-shop in the Piazza Venezia
    Mrs. Chelifer, Miss Elver and Mr. Cardan passed through the
    forum of Trajan. The two little churches lifted their twin domes
    of gold against the sky. From the floor of the forum, deep-sunk
    beneath the level of the road—a foot for every hundred years—rose
    the huge column, with tumbled pillars and blocks of masonry lying
    confusedly round its base. They paused to look round.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I’ve always been a Protestant,’ said Mrs. Chelifer after a
    moment’s silence; ‘but all the same I’ve always felt, whenever I
    came here, that Rome was somehow a special place; that God had
    marked it out in some peculiar way from among other cities as a
    place where the greatest things should happen. It’s a significant
    place, a portentous place—though I couldn’t tell you exactly why.
    One just feels that it is portentous; that’s all. Look at this piazza,
    for example. Two florid little counter-Reformation churches, all
    trumpery pretentiousness and no piety; a mixed lot of ordinary
    houses all round, and in the hole in the middle a huge heathen
    memorial of slaughter. And yet for some reason it all seems to me
    to have a significance, a spiritual meaning; it’s important. And
    the same applies to everything in this extraordinary place. You
    can’t regard it with indifference as you can an ordinary town.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘And yet,’ said Mr. Cardan, ‘a great many tourists and all the
    inhabitants contrive to do so with complete success.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘That’s only because they’ve never looked at the place,’ said
    Mrs. Chelifer. ‘Once you’ve really looked .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>She was interrupted by a loud whoop from Miss Elver, who had
    wandered away from her companions and was looking over the
    railing into the sunken forum.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘What is it?’ called Mr. Cardan. They hurried across the
    street towards her.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Look,’ cried Miss Elver, pointing down, ‘look. All the cats!’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>And there they were. On the sun-warmed marble of a fallen
    column basked a large tabby. A family of ginger kittens were
    playing on the ground below. Small tigers stalked between the
    blocks of masonry. A miniature black panther was standing up on
    its hind legs to sharpen its claws on the bark of a little tree. At
    the foot of the column lay an emaciated corpse.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Puss, puss,’ Miss Elver shrilly yelled.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘No good,’ said Mr. Cardan. ‘They only understand Italian.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Miss Elver looked at him. ‘Perhaps I’d better learn a little,
    then,’ she said. ‘Cat’s Italian.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Mrs. Chelifer meanwhile was looking down very earnestly into
    the forum. ‘Why, there are at least twenty,’ she said. ‘How do
    they get there?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘People who want to get rid of their cats just come and drop
    them over the railing into the forum,’ Mr. Cardan explained.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘And they can’t get out?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘So it seems.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>An expression of distress appeared on Mrs. Chelifer’s gentle
    face. She made a little clicking with her tongue against her teeth
    and sadly shook her head. ‘Dear, dear,’ she said, ‘dear, dear.
    And how do they get fed?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I’ve no idea,’ said Mr. Cardan. ‘Perhaps they feed on one
    another. People throw things down from time to time, no doubt.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘There’s a dead one there, in the middle,’ said Mrs. Chelifer;
    and a note of something like reproach came into her voice, as though
    she found that Mr. Cardan was to blame for the deadness of the
    little corpse at the foot of the triumphal column.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Very dead,’ said Mr. Cardan.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>They walked on. Mrs. Chelifer did not speak; she seemed
    preoccupied.</p>

    <h2>CHAPTER V</h2>

    <p class='pindent'>‘<span class='it'>An pris caruns flucuthukh</span>’; Mr. Cardan beckoned to the
    guide. ‘Bring the lamp a little nearer,’ he said in Italian, and when
    the light had been approached, he went on slowly spelling out the
    primitive Greek writing on the wall of the tomb: ‘<span class='it'>flucuthukh nun
    tithuial khues khathc anulis mulu vizile ziz riin puiian acasri
    flucuper pris an ti ar vus ta aius muntheri flucuthukh</span>.’ He straightened
    himself up. ‘Charming language,’ he said, ‘charming!
    Ever since I learned that the Etruscans used to call the god of wine
    Fufluns, I’ve taken the keenest interest in their language. Fufluns—how
    incomparably more appropriate that is than Bacchus, or
    Liber, or Dionysos! Fufluns, <span class='it'>Fufluns</span>,’ he repeated with delighted
    emphasis. ‘It couldn’t be better. They had a real linguistic
    genius, those creatures. What poets they must have produced!
    “When Fufluns <span class='it'>flucuthukhs</span> the <span class='it'>ziz</span>”—one can imagine the odes in
    praise of wine which began like that. You couldn’t bring together
    eight such juicy, boozy syllables as that in English, could you?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘What about “Ale in a Saxon rumkin” then?’ suggested
    Chelifer.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Mr. Cardan shook his head. ‘It doesn’t compare with the
    Etruscan,’ he said. ‘There aren’t enough consonants. It’s too
    light, too fizzy and trivial. Why, you might be talking about
    soda water.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘But for all you know,’ said Chelifer, ‘<span class='it'>flucuthukh</span> in Etruscan
    may mean soda water. Fufluns, I grant you, is apposite. But
    perhaps it was just a fluke. You have no evidence to show that
    they fitted sound to sense so aptly in other words. “When Fufluns
    <span class='it'>flucuthukhs</span> the <span class='it'>ziz</span>” may be the translation of “When Bacchus
    drowns the hock with soda.” You don’t know.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘You’re quite right,’ Mr. Cardan agreed. ‘I don’t. Nor
    does any one else. My enthusiasm for Fufluns carried me away.
    <span class='it'>Flucuthukh</span> may not have the fruity connotation that a word with a
    sound like that ought to have; it may even, as you say, mean soda
    water. Still, I continue to hope for the best; I believe in my
    Etruscans. One day, when they find the key to this fossilized
    language, I believe I shall be justified; <span class='it'>flucuthukh</span> will turn out
    to be just as appropriate as Fufluns—you mark my words! It’s
    a great language, I insist; a great language. Who knows? A
    couple of generations hence some new Busby or Keat may be
    drumming Etruscan syntax and Etruscan prosody into the backsides
    of British boyhood. Nothing would give me greater satisfaction.
    Latin and Greek have a certain infinitesimal practical
    value. But Etruscan is totally and absolutely useless. What
    better basis for a gentleman’s education could possibly be discovered?
    It’s the great dead language of the future. If Etruscan
    didn’t exist, it would be necessary to invent it.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Which is precisely what the pedagogues will have to do,’ said
    Chelifer, ‘there being no Etruscan literature beyond the inscriptions
    and the rigmarole on the mummy-wrappings at Agram.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘So much the better,’ replied Mr. Cardan. ‘If we wrote it
    ourselves, we might find Etruscan literature interesting. Etruscan
    literature composed by Etruscans would be as boring as any other
    ancient literature. But if the epics were written by you, the
    Socratic dialogues by me, the history by some master of fiction like
    Miss Thriplow—then we’d possess a corpus in which the rare
    schoolboys who can derive some profit from their education could
    take a real interest. And when, a generation hence, we have become
    as much out of date in our ideas as Tully or Horace, the
    literature of Etruria will be rewritten by our descendants. Each
    generation will use the dead language to express its own ideas. And
    expressed in so rich an idiom as I take Etruscan to be, the ideas will
    seem the more significant and memorable. For I have often
    noticed that an idea which, expressed in one’s native language,
    would seem dull, commonplace and opaque, becomes transparent
    to the mind’s eye, takes on a new significance when given a foreign
    and unfamiliar embodiment. A cracker-motto in Latin sounds
    much weightier and truer than the same motto in English. Indeed,
    if the study of dead languages has any use at all, which I should be
    sorry to admit, it consists in teaching us the importance of the verbal
    medium in which thoughts are expressed. To know the same thing
    in several languages is to know it (if you have any sense at all) more
    profoundly, more richly, than if it were known only in one. The
    youth who learns that the god of wine is called, in Etruscan, Fufluns
    has a profounder knowledge of the attributes of that divine personality
    than the youth who only knows him under the name of Bacchus.
    If I desire that archaeologists should discover the key to the Etruscan
    language, it is merely in order that I may have a deeper insight into
    the thing or idea connoted by such sumptuous words as <span class='it'>flucuthukh</span>
    or <span class='it'>khathc</span>. For the rest I care nothing. That they should discover
    the meaning of these inscriptions is a matter to me of the most
    complete indifference. For after all, what would they discover?
    Nothing that we don’t already know. They would discover that
    before the Romans conquered Italy men ate and drank, made love,
    piled up wealth, oppressed their weaker neighbours, diverted themselves
    with sports, made laws and so on. One could have divined
    as much by walking down Piccadilly any day of the week. And
    besides, we have their pictures.’ He threw out his hand. The
    guide, who had been listening patiently to the incomprehensible
    discourse, responded to the gesture by raising his acetylene lamp.
    Called magically into existence by the bright white light, a crowd
    of gaily coloured forms appeared on the walls of the vault in which
    they were standing. Set in a frame of conventionalized trees, a
    pair of red-brown wrestlers with Egyptian eyes and the profiles of
    the Greeks who disport themselves round the flanks of the earliest
    vases were feeling for a hold. On either side of them, beyond the
    trees, stood two couples of long-legged black horses. Above them,
    in the segment of a circle between the upper line of this band of
    paintings and the vaulted roof, a great leopard lay couchant, white-skinned,
    with a pattern of black spots arranged like those on the
    china dogs and cats of a later age. On the wall to the left they were
    feasting: red-brown Etruscans reclined on couches; porcelain-white
    women, contrasting as voluptuously with their tanned companions
    as the pale, plump nymphs of Boucher with their brown
    pastoral lovers, sat by their sides. With hieratic gestures of mutual
    love they pledged one another in bowls of wine. On the opposite
    wall the fowlers were busy—here with slings, there with nets. The
    sky was alive with birds. In the blue sea below they were spearing
    fish. A long inscription ran from right to left across the wall. The
    vaulted roof was painted with chequers, red, black and white.
    Over the low, narrow door that led from the tomb into the ante-chamber
    there knelt a benevolent white bull. Two thousand five
    hundred years ago they had wept here over the newly dead.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘You see them,’ continued Mr. Cardan, ‘hunting, drinking,
    playing, making love. What else could you expect them to do?
    This writing will tell us no more than we know already. True, I
    want to know what it means, but only because I hope that the brown
    man may be saying to the white lady: “<span class='it'>Flucuthukh</span> to me only
    with thine eyes,” or words to that effect, “and I will <span class='it'>flucuthukh</span>
    with mine.” If that was what they really were saying, it would
    throw an entirely new light on the notion of drinking. An entirely
    new light.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘It would throw no new light on love, if lovers they are,’ said
    Mrs. Aldwinkle mournfully.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Wouldn’t it?’ Mr. Cardan queried. ‘But imagine if
    <span class='it'>flucuthukh</span> turned out to mean, not drink, but love. I assure you
    that the feelings denoted by such a word would be quite different
    from those we sum up by “love.” You can make a good guess
    from the sound of the word in any language what the people who
    speak it mean when they talk of love. <span class='it'>Amour</span>, for example—that
    long ou sound with the rolled r at the end of it, how significant it is!
    Ou—you have to push your lips into a snout-like formation, as
    though you were going to kiss. Then, briskly, rrr—you growl like
    a dog. Could anything be more perfectly expressive of the matter-of-fact
    lasciviousness which passes for love in nine-tenths of French
    fiction and drama? And <span class='it'>Liebe</span>—what a languishing, moonlit,
    sentimental sound the long ie has! And how apt, too, is the
    bleating labial by which it is followed!—be,—be. It is a sheep
    whose voice is choked by emotion. All German romanticism is
    implied in the sound of the word. And German romanticism, a
    little <span class='it'>détraqué</span>, turns quite logically into expressionismus and the
    wild erotic extravagance of contemporary German fiction. As for
    our <span class='it'>love</span>—that’s characteristically non-committal and diffident.
    That dim little monosyllable illustrates our English reluctance to
    call a spade a spade. It is the symbol of our national repressions.
    All our hypocrisy and all the beautiful platonism of our poetry is
    there. Love .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.’ Mr. Cardan whispered the word, and holding
    up his finger for silence cocked his ear to catch the faint echoes of
    his voice reverberating from wall to wall under the sepulchral vault.
    ‘Love.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. How utterly different is our English emotion from
    that connoted by <span class='it'>amore</span>! <span class='it'>Amore</span>—you fairly sing the second
    syllable, in a baritone voice, from the chest, with a little throaty
    tremolo on the surface to make it sound more palpitating. <span class='it'>Amore</span>—it’s
    the name of the quality that Stendhal so much admired in
    the Italians and the absence of which in his own countrymen, and
    more especially countrywomen, made him rank Paris below Milan
    or Rome—it’s the apt and perfectly expressive name of passion.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘How true!’ said Mrs. Aldwinkle, brightening for a moment
    through her gloom. This compliment to her Italian language
    and Italian character touched and pleased her. ‘The very sound
    of <span class='it'>amore</span> is passionate. If the English knew what passion meant,
    they’d have found a more expressive word than love. That’s
    certain. But they don’t know.’ She sighed.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Quite so,’ said Mr. Cardan. ‘<span class='it'>Amore</span>, we see, can mean nothing
    else than Southern passion. But now, suppose that <span class='it'>flucuthukh</span>
    should turn out to be the Etruscan for love—what then? <span class='it'>Amour</span>
    connotes lasciviousness, <span class='it'>Liebe</span> sentiment, amore passion. To what
    aspect of the complex phenomenon of love can <span class='it'>flucuthukh</span> refer?
    The microbe Staphylococcus pyogenes produces in some patients
    boils, in others sties in the eye; in certain cases it is even responsible
    for <span class='it'>keratitis punctata</span>. It is the same with love. The symptoms
    vary in different individuals. But owing to the boundless suggestibility
    and imitativeness of man, the commonest symptoms at any
    given period tend to become universal in any one society. Whole
    peoples take the disease in the same way; one suffers from <span class='it'>amour</span>,
    another from <span class='it'>Liebe</span> and so on. But now imagine a people to whom
    love was <span class='it'>flucuthukh</span>. What can have been the particular symptoms
    of the general amorous disease to which such a name was given?
    One cannot guess. But at least it is fascinating to speculate.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>One after the other the party filed out through the narrow door
    into the ante-room of the sepulchre and up the steep flight of steps
    leading to the surface of the ground. Blinking in the bright afternoon
    light, they stepped out on to the bare and windy down.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>It was a solitary place. The arches of a ruined aqueduct went
    striding along the ridge, and following their long recession the eye
    came at last to rest on the walls and tall towers of Corneto. To the
    left the hog-backed down sloped seawards; on the further side of
    the narrow plain at its foot stretched the Mediterranean. On the
    right lay a deep valley, shut in on the further side by a great round
    hill. Its grassy flanks were furrowed and pitted with what had
    once been the works of man. Once, on that hill, had stood the
    sacred city, Tarquinii of the Etruscans. The long bare down on
    which they were standing had been, through how many centuries?
    its necropolis. In little houses hollowed out of the chalky stone
    slept the innumerable dead. Here and there the top of a vault
    was broken through; from the hollow darkness within came up
    even at high summer an immemorial coolness. Here and there
    the surface of the down swelled up into round grass-grown barrows.
    It was from the heart of one of these tumuli that they had now
    emerged. The guide put out his lamp and shut the door upon the
    Etruscan ghosts. They walked for a few hundred yards through
    geological time—between the sea and the hills, under the floating
    clouds; on the sky-line the Middle Ages pricked up their towers;
    the smudged and flattened relics of Etruria undulated almost
    imperceptibly under the grass; from the Roman road in the plain
    below came up the distant hooting of a motor car.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>The sound of the motor horn aroused Irene from the thoughtful
    trance in which, sad-faced and childish, this time, pathetically,
    she was walking. She had been silent and melancholy ever since,
    yesterday morning, they had left Rome; Lord Hovenden had
    stayed behind with Mr. Falx. The long-drawn hooting of the
    electric horn seemed to remind her of something. She looked
    down towards the sea-board plain. A cloud of white dust was
    advancing along the Maremman road from the direction of Civita
    Vecchia. It hung, opaque, over half a mile of road, fading slowly
    to transparency towards the tail. At the head, where the dust was
    thickest, a small black object moved like a rapidly crawling insect
    across the map-like expanse of plain, drawing the cloud after it.
    From the opposite direction came another black-headed comet of
    dust. Like two white serpents they approached one another, as
    though rushing to battle. Nearer, nearer they came. Irene
    stopped still to look at them. She was filled with a horrible apprehension.
    It seemed impossible that they should not crash together.
    Nearer, nearer. The heads of the two serpents seemed almost to
    be touching one another. Suppose, just suppose that one of the
    cars was his.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Inevitably they must collide. Crash and
    smash—oh, the horror of it! Irene shut her eyes. A few seconds
    later she opened them. The two white snakes had merged together
    into one very thick opaque snake. It was impossible to
    see the little black heads at all. For one horrible moment she
    thought that they must have destroyed one another. But they
    reappeared after a little, receding now one from the other, no more
    approaching. The two serpents were still one serpent, but two-headed,
    a long amphisbaena. Then, gradually, the middle of the
    amphisbaena began to grow thin, to fade; a little clump of trees
    showed through it, dimly at first, mistily, then clearly. The
    amphisbaena had fallen in half and the two white snakes crawled
    on, one northwards, the other towards the south, and between their
    fading tails was a wide and ever wider gap. Irene heaved a deep
    sigh of relief and ran on after the others. It seemed to her that she
    had been the witness of a catastrophe miraculously averted. She
    felt much happier than she had felt all day. On a wide road two
    automobiles had passed one another. That was all.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>The guide was unlocking the door that gave entrance to another
    excavated barrow. He relit his lamp and led the way down the
    steep steps into the tomb. On one wall they were horse-racing
    and wrestling, hieratically, all in profile. A goddess—or perhaps
    it was merely the Lady Mayoress of the city—wearing that high
    bonnet-shaped coiffure which the Roman matrons were afterwards
    to borrow from their neighbours, was distributing the prizes. On
    the other walls they were feasting. The red-brown men, the
    white-skinned ladies reclined along their couches. A musician
    stood by, playing on his double flute, and a female dancer, dressed
    in what looked rather like a Persian costume, was dancing a shawl
    dance for the diversion of the diners.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘They seem to have had simple tastes,’ said Mr. Cardan.
    ‘There’s nothing very sophisticated or <span class='it'>fin de siècle</span> here—no bull-baiting
    by naked female acrobats, as at Cnossos; no gladiatorial
    fights, no wholesale butchering of animals, no boring matches with
    brass knuckle-dusters, as in the Roman arenas. A nice school-boyish
    sort of people, it looks to me. Not quite civilized enough
    to be <span class='it'>exigeant</span> about their pleasures.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘And not yet quite civilized enough,’ added Chelifer, ‘to be
    really vulgar. In that respect they fall a long way behind the later
    Romans. Do you know that huge mosaic in the Lateran museum?
    It comes from one of the Imperial baths, I forget which, and consists
    of portraits of the principal sporting heroes of the epoch—boxers
    and wrestlers—with their trainers and backers. These last are
    treated very respectfully by the mosaic-maker, who represents them
    wearing togas and standing in the noblest attitudes. One sees at a
    glance that they are the <span class='it'>gens bien</span>, the sportsmen, the amateurs—in
    a word, the monied interest. The athletes are portrayed in a state
    of nature, and are indeed so excessively natural that one could
    easily mistake the heavy-weight boxers for gorillas peeled of their
    superfluous hair. Under each portrait is a caption with the name
    of the hero represented. The whole thing reminds one very much
    of the sporting page in a picture paper—only it is a page that is
    forty feet long by thirty wide, and made, not of wood-pulp, but of
    the most durable materials ever devised by the ingenuity of man for
    the embodiment and visible eternization of his thoughts. And it
    is, I think, precisely the size and everlastingness of the frightful
    thing that makes it so much worse than the similar page from our
    picture papers. To make ephemeral heroes of professional sportsmen
    and prize-fighters is bad enough; but that a people should
    desire to immortalize their fame is surely indicative of a profounder
    vulgarity and abjection. Like the Roman mob, the mobs of our
    modern capitals delight in sports and exercises which they themselves
    do not practise; but at any rate, the fame of our professionals lasts
    only a day after their triumph. We do not print their effigies on
    marble pavements made to live down a hundred generations of
    men. We print them on wood-pulp, which is much the same as
    printing them on water. It is comforting to think that by the
    year two thousand one hundred the whole of contemporary journalism,
    literature and thought will have crumbled to dust. The
    mosaic, however, will still be in its present state of perfect preservation.
    Nothing short of dynamite or an earthquake will ever totally
    destroy the effigies of those Imperial boxers. And a very good thing,
    too, for the future historians of Rome. For no man can claim that
    he has really understood the Roman empire till he has studied that
    mosaic. That pavement is a vessel filled with the quintessence of
    Roman reality. A drop of that reality is enough to shrivel up all
    the retrospective Utopias that historians have ever made or ever
    can make out of the chronicles of ancient Rome. After looking
    at that mosaic a man can have no more generous illusions about
    the people who admired it or the age in which it was made. He
    will realize that Roman civilization was not merely just as sordid as
    ours, but if anything more sordid. But in these Etruscan vaults,’
    Chelifer added, looking round at the frescoed walls, ‘one gets no
    such impression of organized and efficient beastliness as one gets
    from the Roman mosaic. There’s a freshness, as you say, Mr.
    Cardan, a certain jolly schoolboyishness about all the fun they
    represent. But I have no doubt, of course, that the impression is
    entirely fallacious. Their art has a certain archaic charm; but
    the artists were probably quite as sophisticated and quite as repulsive
    as their Roman successors.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Come, come,’ said Mr. Cardan, ‘you forget that they called
    Bacchus Fufluns. Give them at least the credit that is due to them.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘But the Romans too had a fine language,’ Chelifer objected.
    ‘And yet they laid down immense enlargements of the sporting page
    of the <span class='it'>Daily Sketch</span> in marble tesserae on a foundation of cement.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>They climbed again towards the light. The steps were so high
    and her legs so short that Miss Elver had to be helped up. The
    tomb resounded with her laughter and shrill whooping. They
    emerged at last out of the ground.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>On the top of a high barrow some two or three hundred yards
    away stood the figure of a man, distinct against the sky. He was
    shading his eyes with his hand and seemed to be looking for something.
    Irene suddenly became very red.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Why, I believe it’s Hovenden,’ she said in a voice that was as
    casual as she could make it.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Almost simultaneously the man turned his face in their direction.
    The shading hand went up in a gesture of greeting. A glad ‘Hullo!’
    sounded across the tombs; the man skipped down from his barrow
    and came running across the down towards them. And Hovenden
    it was; Irene had seen aright.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Been looking for you all over ve place,’ he explained breathlessly
    as he came up. With the greatest heartiness he shook the
    hands of all present except—diplomatically—Irene’s. ‘Vey told
    me in ve town vat a party of foreigners was out here looking at ve
    cemetery or somefing. So I buzzed after you till I saw old Ernest
    wiv ve car at ve side of ve road. Been underground, have you?’
    He looked into the dark entrance of the tomb. ‘No wonder I
    couldn’t .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Mrs. Aldwinkle cut him short. ‘But why aren’t you in Rome
    with Mr. Falx?’ she asked.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Lord Hovenden’s boyish, freckled face became all at once exceedingly
    red. ‘Ve fact is,’ he said, looking at the ground, ‘vat I
    didn’t feel very well. Ve doctor said I ought to get away from
    Rome at once. Country air, you know. So I just left a note for
    Mr. Falx and .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. and here I am.’ He looked up again, smiling.</p>

    <h2>CHAPTER VI</h2>

    <p class='pindent'>‘But at Montefiascone,’ said Mr. Cardan, concluding the
    history of the German bishop who gave the famous wine of Montefiascone
    its curious name, ‘at Montefiascone Bishop Defuk’s servant
    found good wine at every shop and tavern; so that when his master
    arrived he found the prearranged symbol chalked up on a hundred
    doors. <span class='it'>Est, Est, Est</span>—the town was full of them. And the Bishop
    was so much enraptured with the drink that he decided to settle in
    Montefiascone for life. For life—but he drank so much that in a
    very short time it turned out that he had settled here for death.
    They buried him in the lower church, down there. On his tombstone
    his servant engraved the Bishop’s portrait with this brief
    epitaph: “<span class='it'>Est Est Jo Defuk. Propter nimium hic est. Dominus
    meus mortuus est.</span>” Since when the wine has always been called
    Est Est Est. We’ll have a flask of it dry for serious drinking.
    And for the frivolous and the feminine, and to sip with the dessert,
    we’ll have a bottle of the sweet <span class='it'>moscato</span>. And now let’s see what
    there is to eat.’ He picked up the menu and holding it out at arm’s
    length—for he had the long sight of old age—read out slowly, with
    comments, the various items. It was always Mr. Cardan who
    ordered the dinner (although it was generally Lord Hovenden or
    Mrs. Aldwinkle who paid), always Mr. Cardan; for it was tacitly
    admitted by every one that Mr. Cardan was the expert on food
    and wine, the professional eater, the learned and scholarly
    drinker.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Seeing Mr. Cardan busy with the bill of fare, the landlord
    approached, rubbing his hands and cordially smiling—as well he
    might on a Rolls-Royce-full of foreigners—to take orders and
    give advice.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘The fish,’ he confided to Mr. Cardan, ‘the fish is something
    special.’ He put his fingers to his lips and kissed them. ‘It
    comes from Bolsena, from the lake, down there.’ He pointed out
    of the window at the black night. Somewhere, far down through
    the darkness, lay the Lake of Bolsena.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Mr. Cardan held up his hand. ‘No, no,’ he objected with
    decision and shook his head. ‘Don’t talk to me of fish. Never
    safe in these little places,’ he explained to his companions. ‘Particularly
    in such hot weather. And then, imagine eating fish from
    Bolsena—a place where they have miracles, where holy wafers
    bleed for the edification of the pious and as a proof of the fact of
    transubstantiation. No, no,’ Mr. Cardan repeated, ‘fishes from
    Bolsena are altogether too fishy. Let’s stick to fried eggs, with
    fillet of veal to follow. Or a little roast capon .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I want fish,’ said Miss Elver. The passionate earnestness of her
    tone contrasted strikingly with the airiness of Mr. Cardan’s banter.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I really wouldn’t, you know,’ said Mr. Cardan.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘But I like fish.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘But it may be unwholesome. You never can tell.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘But I want it,’ Miss Elver insisted. ‘I love fish.’ Her
    large lower lip began to tremble, her eyes filled with tears. ‘I
    <span class='it'>want</span> it.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Well, then, of course you shall have it,’ said Mr. Cardan, making
    haste to console her. ‘Of course, if you really like it. I was only
    afraid that it mightn’t perhaps be good. But it probably will be.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Miss Elver took comfort, blew her long nose and smiled.
    ‘Thank you, Tommy,’ she said, and blushed as she pronounced
    the name.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>After dinner they went out into the piazza for coffee and liqueurs.
    The square was crowded and bright with lights. In the middle
    the band of the local Philharmonic Society was giving its Sunday
    evening concert. Planted on the rising ground above the piazza
    Sammicheli’s great church solemnly impended. The lights struck
    up, illuminating its pilastered walls. The cupola stood out
    blackly against the sky.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘The choice,’ said Mr. Cardan, looking round the piazza, ‘seems
    to lie between the Café Moderno and the Bar Ideale. Personally,
    I should be all for the ideal rather than the real if it wasn’t for the
    disagreeable fact that in a bar one has to stand. Whereas in a café,
    however crassly materialistic, one can sit down. I’m afraid the
    Moderno forces itself upon us.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>He led the way in the direction of the café.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Talking of Bars,’ said Chelifer, as they sat down at a little table
    in front of the café, ‘has it ever occurred to you to enumerate the
    English words that have come to have an international currency?
    It’s a somewhat curious selection, and one which seems to me to
    throw a certain light on the nature and significance of our Anglo-Saxon
    civilization. The three words from Shakespeare’s language
    that have a completely universal currency are Bar, Sport and W.C.
    They’re all just as good Finnish now as they are good English.
    Each of these words possesses what I may call a family. Round
    the idea “Bar” group themselves various other international
    words, such as Bitter, Cocktail, Whiskey and the like. “Sport”
    boasts a large family—Match, for example, Touring Club, the verb
    to Box, Cycle-Car, Performance (in the sporting sense) and various
    others. The idea of hydraulic sanitation has only one child that
    I can think of, namely Tub. Tub—it has a strangely old-world
    sound in English nowadays; but in Yugo-Slavia, on the other hand,
    it is exceedingly up-to-date. Which leads us on to that very odd
    class of international English words that have never been good
    English at all. A Smoking for example, a Dancing, a Five-o’clock—these
    have never existed except on the continent of Europe. As
    for High-Life, so popular a word in Athens, where it is spelt iota,
    gamma, lambda, iota, phi—that dates from a remote, mid-Victorian
    epoch in the history of our national culture.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘And Spleen,’ said Mr. Cardan, ‘you forget Spleen. That
    comes from much further back. A fine aristocratic word, that;
    we were fools to allow it to become extinct. One has to go to
    France to hear it uttered now.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘The word may be dead,’ said Chelifer, I but the emotion, I
    fancy, has never flourished more luxuriantly than now. The more
    material progress, the more wealth and leisure, the more standardized
    amusements—the more boredom. It’s inevitable, it’s the
    law of Nature. The people who have always suffered from spleen
    and who are still the principal victims, are the prosperous, leisured
    and educated. At present they form a relatively small minority;
    but in the Utopian state where everybody is well off, educated and
    leisured, everybody will be bored; unless for some obscure reason
    the same causes fail to produce the same effects. Only two or
    three hundred people out of every million could survive a lifetime
    in a really efficient Utopian state. The rest would simply die of
    spleen. In this way, it may be, natural selection will work towards
    the evolution of the super-man. Only the intelligent will be able
    to bear the almost intolerable burden of leisure and prosperity.
    The rest will simply wither away, or cut their throats—or, perhaps
    more probably, return in desperation to the delights of barbarism
    and cut one another’s throats, not to mention the throats of the
    intelligent.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘That certainly sounds the most likely and natural ending,’
    said Mr. Cardan. ‘If of two possible alternatives one is in harmony
    with our highest aspirations and the other is, humanly speaking,
    absolutely pointless and completely wasteful, then, you may be sure,
    Nature will choose the second.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>At half-past ten Miss Elver complained that she did not feel
    very well. Mr. Cardan sighed and shook his head. ‘These
    miraculous fishes,’ he said. They went back to the hotel.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Luckily,’ said Mrs. Aldwinkle that evening while Irene was
    brushing her hair, ‘luckily I never had any babies. They spoil
    the figure so frightfully.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Still,’ Irene ventured to object, ‘still .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. they must be
    rather fun, all the same.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Mrs. Aldwinkle pretexted a headache and sent her to bed almost
    at once. At half-past two in the morning Irene was startled out of
    her sleep by a most melancholy groaning and crying from the room
    next to hers. ‘Oo, Oo! Ow!’ It was Grace Elver’s voice.
    Irene jumped out of bed and ran to see what was the matter. She
    found Miss Elver lying in a tumbled bed, writhing with pain.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘What is it?’ she asked.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Miss Elver made no articulate answer. ‘Oo, Oo,’ she kept
    repeating, turning her head from side to side as though in the hope
    of escaping from the obsessing pain.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Irene ran to her aunt’s bedroom, knocked at the door and, getting
    no answer, walked in. ‘Aunt Lilian,’ she called in the darkness,
    and louder, ‘Aunt Lilian!’ There was still no sound. Irene
    felt for the switch and turned on the light. Mrs. Aldwinkle’s bed
    was empty. Irene stood there for a moment looking dubiously
    at the bed, wondering, speculating. From down the corridor
    came the repeated ‘Oo, Oo!’ of Grace Elver’s inarticulate pain.
    Roused by the sound from her momentary inaction, Irene turned,
    stepped across the passage and began knocking at Mr. Cardan’s door.</p>

    <h2>CHAPTER VII</h2>

    <p class='pindent'><span class='it'>Selections from Francis Chelifer</span></p>

    <p class='pindent'>In the sporting calendar the most interesting events are booked
    for the autumnal months. There is no hunting in the spring.
    And even in Italy there is a brief close season for song-birds that
    lasts from the coming of the nightingales to the departure of the
    last swallow. The fun, the real fun, starts only in the autumn.
    Grouse-shooting, partridge-shooting—these are the gay preliminaries.
    But the great day is the First of October, when the massacre
    of the gaudy pheasant begins. Crack! crack!—the double barrels
    make music in the fading woods. And a little later the harmonious
    dogs join in and the hoof, as the Latin poet so aptly puts it, the
    hoof shakes the putrid field with quadrupedantical sound. Winter
    is made gay with the noise of hunting.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>It is the same in the greater year of certain feminine lives.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
    Pop! pop!—on the First of October they go out to shoot the
    pheasant. A few weeks later, tally-ho, they hunt the fox. And on
    Guy Fawkes’s day the man-eating season begins. My hostess,
    when she picked me up on the beach of Marina di Vezza, had
    reached a point in her year somewhere between pheasant-shooting
    and man-eating. They say that foxes enjoy being hunted; but
    I venture to doubt the truth of this comforting hypothesis. Experientia
    does it, as Mrs. Micawber’s papa (ha ha! from Mr.
    Toft) .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Etcetera.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>If loving without being loved in return may be ranked as one of
    the most painful of experiences, being loved without loving is
    certainly one of the most boring. Perhaps no experience is better
    calculated to make one realize the senselessness of the passion. The
    spectacle of some one making a fool of himself arouses only laughter.
    When one is playing the fool oneself, one weeps. But when one is
    neither the active imbecile nor the disinterested spectator, but the
    unwilling cause of somebody else’s folly—then it is that one comes
    to feel that weariness and that disgust which are the proper, the
    human reaction to any display of the deep animal stupidity that is
    the root of all evil.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Twice in my life have I experienced these salutary horrors of
    boredom—once by my own fault, because I asked to be loved without
    loving; and once because I had the misfortune to be picked up
    on the beach, limp as sea-weed, between the First of October and
    Guy Fawkes’s day. The experiences were disagreeable while they
    lasted; but on the other hand, they were highly didactic. The
    first of them rounded off, so to speak, the lesson I had learned from
    Barbara. The second episode was staged by Providence, some
    few years later, to remind me of the first and to print what the
    Americans would call its ‘message’ still more indelibly upon my
    mind. Providence has been remarkably persistent in its efforts
    to sober me. To what end I cannot imagine.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Poor Miss Masson! She was a very good secretary. By the
    end of 1917 she knew all that it was possible to know about rubber
    tubing and castor oil. It was unfortunate for every one concerned
    that Providence should have destined her to instruct me yet more
    deeply in the fearful mysteries of love. True, I brought it on
    myself. Providence, on that occasion, elected to act indirectly
    and threw the blame on me. I accept it all—all the more willingly
    since my act shows in the most illuminating manner what are the
    consequences, the frightful consequences, of stupidity. There is a
    certain satisfaction to be derived from having personally proved the
    truth of one’s own wisdom by acting in defiance of its precepts.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Yes, I brought it on myself. For it was I who made the first
    advances. It was I who, out of pure wantonness, provoked the
    sleeping, or at least well-disciplined tiger that lay hidden in
    Dorothy Masson’s heart—put my walking-stick between the bars
    and, against all the rules, poked it rudely in the ribs. I got what I
    asked for.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>I was like that wanton Blackamoor in one of old Busch’s misanthropically
    comic picture-books.</p>

    <div class='poetry-container' style=''><div class='lgp'> <!-- rend=';' -->
    <p class='line0'>Ein Mohr aus Bosheit und Pläsier</p>
    <p class='line0'>Schiesst auf das Elefantentier.</p>
    </div></div> <!-- end poetry block --><!-- end rend -->

    <p class='noindent'>With his little arrow he punctures the placid pachyderm; and the
    pachyderm takes his revenge, elaborately, through fourteen subsequent
    woodcuts.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>My only excuse—the recentness of that ludicrous catastrophe
    with which the tragedy of Barbara had concluded—was an excuse
    that might equally have served as an additional reason against doing
    what I did; I ought, after having once been bitten, to have shown
    myself twice shy. But in the state of misery in which I found
    myself I hoped that a second bite might distract my attention from
    the anguish of the first. And even this is not precisely accurate;
    for I never anticipated that the second would really be a bite at all.
    I looked forward merely to a kind of playful diversion, not to anything
    painful. True, when I found how serious the affair threatened
    to become for Dorothy Masson, I might have guessed that it
    would soon be serious also for myself, and have drawn back. But,
    inspired by that high-spirited irresponsibility which I have come
    since then so highly to admire in the natural, brutish human specimen,
    I refused to consider possible consequences and went on in the
    course I had begun. I was not in the least in love with the woman;
    nor did her person inspire me with any specific desire. My motive
    forces were misery, mingled with a kind of exasperation, and the
    vague itch of recurrent appetite. More than half of the world’s
    ‘affairs’ have no more definite reasons for occurring. Ennui and
    itch are their first causes. Subsequently imagination may come
    into play and love will be born. Or experience may beget specific
    desires and in so doing may render one party necessary to the happiness
    of the other, or each to each. Or perhaps there will be no
    development at all and the affair will end placidly as it began, in
    itch and ennui.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>But there are cases, of which mine was one, where one party may
    be inspired by the mere indefinite wantonness I have been describing,
    while the other is already imagination-ridden and in love.
    Poor Dorothy! There came into her eyes when I kissed her a look
    such as I had never seen in any other human eyes before or since.
    It was the look one sees in the eyes of a dog when its master is angry
    and raises his whip—a look of absolute self-abasement mingled with
    terror. There was something positively appalling in seeing those
    eyes staring at one out of a woman’s face. To see a human being
    reduced in one’s arms to the condition of a frightened and adoring
    dog is a shocking thing. And the more so in this case since it was
    completely indifferent to me whether she was in my arms or not.
    But when she raised her face and looked at me for a moment with
    those abject and terrified eyes of hers, it was not merely indifferent
    to me; it was even positively distasteful. The sight of those
    large-pupilled eyes, in which there was no glimmer of a human
    rational soul, but only an animal’s terror and abasement, made
    me feel at once guilty and, complementarily, angry, resentful and
    hostile.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Why do you look at me like that?’ I asked her once. ‘As
    though you were frightened of me.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>She did not answer; but only hid her face against my shoulder,
    and pressed me more closely in her arms. Her body shook with
    involuntary startings and tremblings. Casually, from force of habit,
    I caressed her. The trembling became more violent. ‘Don’t,’
    she implored me in a faint hoarse whisper, ‘don’t.’ But she
    pressed me still closer.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>She was frightened, it seemed, not of me but of herself, of that
    which lay sleeping in the depths of her being and whose awakening
    threatened to overwhelm, to blot for a moment out of existence that
    well-ordered, reasonable soul which was the ruler at ordinary times
    of her life. She was afraid of the power within her that could
    make her become something other than her familiar self. She was
    fearful of losing her self-mastery. And at the same time there was
    nothing else that she desired. The sleeping power within her had
    begun to stir and there was no resisting it. Vainly, hopelessly,
    she continued to attempt the impossible. She went on trying to
    resist, and her resistance quickened her desire to yield. She was
    afraid and yet invited my awakening kisses. And while she
    whispered to me imploringly, like one who begs for mercy, she
    pressed me in her arms. I, meanwhile, had begun to realize all the
    potentialities for boredom implicit in the situation. And how
    boring it did in fact turn out to be! To be pursued by restless
    warmth when all that one desires is cool peace; to be perpetually
    and quite justly accused of remissness in love and to have to deny
    the accusation, feebly, for the sake of politeness; to be compelled
    to pass hours in tedious company—what an affliction, what a martyrdom
    it is! I came to feel extremely sorry for those pretty women
    who are perpetually being courted by a swarm of men. But the
    pretty women, I reflected, had this advantage over me: that they
    were by nature a good deal more interested in love than I. Love
    is their natural business, the reason of their existence; however
    distasteful their suitors may personally be to them, they cannot find
    them as completely boring and insufferable as would, placed in
    similar circumstances, a person to whom love as such is fundamentally
    rather uninteresting. The most tedious lover atones a
    little, in the eyes of the courted lady, for his personal insupportableness
    by the generic fact of being a lover. Lacking a native enthusiasm
    for love, I found it more difficult to support the martyrdom
    of being loved by Miss Masson.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>But such an affair, you will object, is a typical piece of reality.
    True; but at that time I was not quite such a believer in the real
    and earnest side of life as I am now. And even now I should
    regard it as something of a work of supererogation to associate with
    realities of so exceptionally penetrative a nature. A sober man, if
    he is logical and courageous, is bound to pass his life between Gog’s
    Court and Miss Carruthers’s. But he is not bound to make love to
    Miss Carruthers or to provoke the clinging affections of Fluffy.
    That would be too much—so it seems to me, at any rate at present;
    though perhaps the time may come when I shall feel strong enough
    to take my reality in these stiff doses. There is an electric machine
    used by masseurs for driving iodine into stiffened joints. Love acts
    like this machine; it serves to drive the lover’s personality into
    the mind of the beloved. I am strong enough at present to be able
    to bathe in the personalities of ordinary human animals; but I
    should be suffocated, I should faint away, if the muddy swill were
    to be pumped into my spiritual system by the penetrating electricity
    of love.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Miss Masson stood one Galtonian class higher than Miss
    Carruthers or Fluffy. One out of every four people is a Fluffy;
    only one out of every six is a Dorothy Masson. It makes a slight
    but perceptible difference. None the less, how much I suffered!
    When I brought her a few orchids as a present, remarking as I gave
    them to her that they looked so delightfully like artificial flowers,
    she would thank me and say she adored orchids, adding after a
    moment’s pause for thought that she liked them because they looked
    so like artificial flowers. And she laughed softly to herself, she
    looked up at me for confirmatory applause. For that little habit
    alone I sometimes felt that I could have murdered her. But her
    solicitude, her reproaches, expressed or more often mute (for she
    rarely made scenes, but only looked at me with those sad brown eyes),
    her incessant desire to be close to me, to touch me, to kiss and be
    kissed—these were almost enough to drive me to suicide. It
    lasted for more than a year, an eternity. And technically it still
    lasts; for I never broke with her, never dramatically quitted her,
    but only quietly and gradually faded out of her life like the Cheshire
    Cat. Sometimes, even, we still meet. And still, as though nothing
    had happened, I take her in my arms and kiss her, till that strange
    expression of abject terror comes again into her eyes, till she
    implores me, in a voice made faint with excessive desire, to spare her
    well-disciplined everyday soul and not deliver it into the power of
    the fearful thing that is waking darkly within her. And still as
    she speaks she presses me closer, she offers her stretched throat to
    my kisses. And before and after, we talk about politics and common
    friends. And still as of old she echoes the last phrase I have spoken,
    still softly laughs and still expects me to admire her original thoughts.
    Finally I take my leave.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘You’ll come again soon?’ she asks, looking up into my face
    with eyes that are full of sadness and apprehension, of questions
    unuttered, of unexpressed reproaches. I kiss her hand. ‘Of
    course,’ I say. And I go away, taking pains as I walk down the
    street not to speculate on the subject of her thoughts.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>But Providence seems to have thought my connection with
    Dorothy inadequately instructive. Dorothy, after all, was only
    twenty-six when the episode began. Hers was that vernal and
    flowery season during which, even in Italy, warblers are not shot.
    It would be another twenty years before she reached her First of
    October; thirty, perhaps, before the man-eating season should
    begin. And it was I who had made the first advances. But for
    my exhibition of <span class='it'>Bosheit und Pläsier</span> the boring history would never
    have unrolled itself. But Providence, anxious, for some inscrutable
    reason, to teach me a yet more memorable lesson, went so far as
    almost to drown me, so determined was it that I should fall into the
    hands of the suitable schoolmistress. I was to learn how ludicrously
    dreadful, as well as how boring, love can be.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>I made no advances on this occasion. From the first I did
    nothing but retreat. Mrs. Aldwinkle’s blue danger signals bore
    down on me; like an agile pedestrian in the London traffic, I
    stepped aside. When she asked what women had inspired me, I
    answered that nothing inspired me but the London slums and the
    vulgarity of Lady Giblet. When she said that one could see by my
    face that I had been unhappy, I said that that was odd; I had always
    been perfectly happy. When she talked about experience, meaning,
    as women generally do when they use that word, merely love, I
    replied with a discussion of experience in relation to the Theory of
    Knowledge. When she accused me of wearing a mask, I protested
    that I paraded my naked soul for every one to see. When she asked
    if I had ever been in love, I shrugged my shoulders and smiled:
    not to speak of. And when she asked, at very close range, if I
    had ever been loved, I answered quite truthfully that I had, but
    that it bored me.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>But still, indomitably, she renewed the attack. There might
    have been something grand about her unwavering determination—something
    grand, if it had not been grotesque. Providence was
    teaching me yet once more that the unsapient life is a dreary and
    hopeless business, and that it is, for all practical purposes, the only
    life—lived everywhere by all but a negligibly few exceptions. At
    least I presume that that is what Providence was trying to impress
    on me. But in the process it was using Mrs. Aldwinkle, I thought,
    rather hardly. I felt sorry for the poor lady. Some hidden
    irrational force within herself was compelling her to cut these
    capers, throw herself into these ludicrous postures, say these stupid
    words and contort her face into these grimaces; she was helpless.
    She just obeyed orders and did her best; but her best was ludicrous.
    And not merely ludicrous but appalling. She was like a buffoon
    carrying a skull.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Unflaggingly she played the deplorable part assigned to her.
    Every day she brought me flowers. ‘I want them to blossom in
    your verses,’ she said. I assured her that the only scent which
    provoked me to write was that of the butchers’ shops on a winter’s
    evening along the Harrow Road. She smiled at me. ‘Don’t
    think I can’t understand you,’ she said. ‘I do. I do.’ She
    leaned forward; her eyes shone, her perfume enveloped me, she
    breathed heliotrope in my face. I could see with extraordinary
    distinctness the little wrinkles round her eyes, the careless smear
    of rouge at the corners of the mouth. ‘I do understand you,’
    she repeated.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>She did understand me.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. One night (it was at Montefiascone,
    on our way back from Rome), when I was reading in bed,
    I heard a sound; I looked up, and saw Mrs. Aldwinkle carefully
    closing the door behind her. She was wearing a dressing-gown of
    sea-green silk. Her hair hung in two thick plaits over her shoulders.
    When she turned round, I saw that her face had been coloured and
    powdered with more than ordinary care. In silence she advanced
    across the room, she sat down on the edge of my bed. An aura
    of ambergris and heliotrope surrounded her.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>I smiled politely, closed my book (keeping a finger, however,
    between the pages to mark my place) and slightly raised my eyebrows
    in interrogation. To what, I made my face inquire, do I
    owe the honour? .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>I owed it, it seemed, to my hostess’s urgently felt need to tell
    me yet once more that she understood me.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I couldn’t bear,’ she said breathlessly, ‘couldn’t bear to think
    of you here alone. With your secret misery.’ And when I made
    as though to protest, she held up her hand. ‘Oh, don’t think
    I haven’t seen through your mask. Alone with your secret
    misery .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘No, really .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.’ I managed to put in. But Mrs. Aldwinkle
    would not suffer herself to be interrupted.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I couldn’t bear to think of your terrible loneliness,’ she went
    on. ‘I wanted you to know there was at least one person who
    understood.’ She leaned towards me, smiling, but with lips that
    trembled. All at once her eyes filled with tears, her face contorted
    itself into the terrible grimace of misery. She made a little moaning
    noise and, letting herself fall forward, she hid her face against my
    knees. ‘I love you, I love you,’ she repeated in a muffled voice.
    Her body was shaken by recurrent spasms of sobbing. I was left
    wondering what to do. This was not in the programme. When
    one goes out man-eating or pheasant-shooting, one has no business to
    weep over the victim. But the trouble is, of course, that the man-eater
    sees herself as the victim. <span class='it'>Hinc illae lacrimae.</span> It is impossible
    for two human beings to agree completely about anything.
    <span class='it'>Quot homines</span>, for now that the Dictionary of Familiar Quotations
    has been opened I may as well continue to make use of it, <span class='it'>quot
    homines, tot disputandum est</span>. There is no agreement even about
    the truths of science. One man is a geometrician; the other can
    only understand analysis. One is incapable of believing in anything
    of which he cannot make a working model; the other wants his
    truth as abstract as it is possible to make it. But when it comes to
    deciding which of two people is the victim and which the man-eater,
    there is nothing to be done but abandon the attempt. Let each
    party stick to his own opinion. The most successful men are those
    who never admit the validity of other people’s opinions, who even
    deny their existence.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘My dear Lilian,’ I said (she had insisted on my calling her
    Lilian within a day or two of my arrival), ‘my dear Lilian .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.’
    I could find nothing more to say. A successful man, I suppose,
    would have said something frankly brutal, something that would
    have made it clear to Mrs. Aldwinkle which of the two, in his
    opinion, was the victim and which the carnivore. I lacked the
    force. Mrs. Aldwinkle went on sobbing.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I love you. Couldn’t you love me a little? A little only?
    I would be your slave. Your slave; I’d be your slave,’ she kept
    repeating.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>What things she said! I listened to her, feeling pity—yes,
    pity no doubt—but still more, a profound embarrassment, and with
    it anger against the person who had thrust me into this untenable
    position.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘It’s no good,’ I protested. ‘It’s impossible.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>She only began again, desperately.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>How much further the scene might have prolonged itself and
    what might have happened if it had been protracted, I do not know.
    Luckily, however, an extraordinary commotion suddenly broke
    loose in the hotel. Doors slammed, voices were raised, there was
    the noise of feet along the corridors and on the stairs. Startled
    and alarmed, Mrs. Aldwinkle got up, went to the door, opened it a
    crack and looked into the passage. Some one hurried past; hastily
    she closed it again. When the coast was clear, she slipped out into
    the passage and tip-toed away, leaving me alone.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>The commotion was caused by the beginning of Miss Elver’s
    death-agony. Providence, having decided that my education had
    gone far enough, had broken off the lesson. The means it employed
    were, I must say, rather violent. A vain man might have been
    gratified by the reflection that one woman had been made miserable
    in order that he might be taught a lesson, while another had died—like
    King John, of a surfeit of lampreys—in order that the lesson
    might be interrupted before it was carried too disagreeably far.
    But as it happens, I am not particularly vain.</p>

    <h2>CHAPTER VIII</h2>

    <p class='pindent'>From the first nobody put very much faith in the local doctor;
    the mere look of him was enough to inspire mistrust. But when
    across the patient’s prostrate and comatose body he chattily confided
    that he had taken his degree at the University of Siena,
    Mr. Cardan decided that it was time to send for somebody else.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Siena’s notorious,’ he whispered. ‘It’s the place where the
    imbeciles who can’t get their degrees at Bologna, or Rome, or Pisa
    go and have themselves made doctors.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Mrs. Aldwinkle, who in the middle of the tumult had suddenly
    reappeared (Irene did not know from where), expressed her horror.
    Doctors were one of her specialities; she was very particular about
    doctors. Mrs. Aldwinkle had had a number of interesting maladies
    in the course of her life—three nervous break-downs, an appendicitis,
    gout and various influenzas, pneumonias and the like, but all
    of them aristocratic and avowable diseases; for Mrs. Aldwinkle
    distinguished sharply between complaints that are vulgar and complaints
    of a gentlemanly sort. Chronic constipation, hernia,
    varicose veins (‘bad legs’ as the poor so gruesomely call them)—these,
    obviously, were vulgar diseases which no decent person could
    suffer from, or at any rate, suffering, talk about. Her illnesses had
    all been extremely refined and correspondingly expensive. What
    she did not know about doctors, English, French, Swiss, German,
    Swedish and even Japanese, was not worth knowing. Mr. Cardan’s
    remarks about the University of Siena impressed her profoundly.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘The only thing to do,’ she said decisively, ‘is for Hovenden to
    drive straight back to Rome and bring back a specialist. At once.’
    She spoke peremptorily. It was a comfort for her, in her present
    distress of mind, to be able to do something, to make arrangements,
    to order people about, even herself to carry and fetch. ‘The
    Principessa gave me the name of a wonderful man. I’ve got it
    written down somewhere. Come.’ And she darted off to her room.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Obediently Lord Hovenden followed her, wrote down the
    talismanic name and took himself off. Chelifer was waiting for him
    at the bottom of the stairs.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I may as well come with you, if you don’t mind,’ he said.
    ‘I think I should only be in the way here.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>It was nearly half-past five when they started. The sun had not
    yet risen, but it was already light. The sky was pale grey with dark
    clouds low down on the horizon. There were mists in the valleys
    and the Lake of Bolsena was hidden from view under what seemed
    the waters of a milky sea. The air was cold. Driving out of the
    town, they met a train of pack mules climbing slowly, in the midst of
    a jingle of bells, up the steep street towards the market-place.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Viterbo was still asleep when they drove through. From the
    crest of the Ciminian mountains they first saw the sun. By seven
    o’clock they were in Rome. The sun-tipped obelisks, the gilded
    roofs and cupolas reached up out of shadow into the pale blue sky.
    They drove up the Corso. In the Piazza di Venezia they stopped
    at a café, ordered some coffee, and while it was being brought
    looked up in a directory the address of Mrs. Aldwinkle’s doctor.
    He lived, they found, in the new quarter near the station.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I leave all ve talking to you,’ said Hovenden, as they sipped
    their coffee. ‘I’m no good at ve language.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘How did you manage the other day when you had to see the
    doctor yourself?’ Chelifer inquired.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Lord Hovenden blushed. ‘Well,’ he said, ‘as a matter of fact,
    ve doctor I saw was English. But he’s gone away now,’ he added
    hastily, for fear that Chelifer might suggest their bringing the
    English doctor along too; ‘gone to Naples,’ he further specified,
    hoping by the accumulation of circumstantial details to give greater
    verisimilitude to his story, ‘for an operation.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘He was a surgeon, then?’ Chelifer raised his eyebrows.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Hovenden nodded. ‘A surgeon,’ he echoed, and buried his face
    in his coffee-cup.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>They drove on. As they turned out of the Piazza into Trajan’s
    Forum, Chelifer noticed a little crowd, mostly of street boys,
    pressing against the railings on the further side of the forum. At
    its centre stood a pale thin woman in dove-grey clothes whom even
    at this distance one could not fail to recognize as English, or at any
    rate definitely not Italian. The lady in grey was leaning over the
    railings, lowering very carefully at the end of a string, to which
    it was ingeniously attached by four subsidiary strings passed through
    holes bored in the rim, a large aluminium pannikin filled with
    milk. Slowly revolving as it went down, the pannikin was lowered
    to the floor of the sunken forum. Hardly had it touched the
    ground when, with simultaneous mewings and purrings, half a
    dozen thirsty cats came running up to it and began to lap at the
    white milk. Others followed; every cranny gave up its cat.
    Lean toms jumped down from their marble pedestals and trotted
    across the open with the undulating, bounding gait of a running
    leopard. Month-old kittens staggered up on tottering legs. In
    a few seconds the pannikin was besieged by a horde of cats. The
    street boys whooped with delight.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Well, I’m blowed,’ said Lord Hovenden, who had slowed up
    to watch the curious scene. ‘I believe it’s your mover.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I think it is,’ said Chelifer, who had recognized her long ago.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Would you like me to stop?’ asked Hovenden.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Chelifer shook his head. ‘I think we’d better get to the doctor
    as quickly as possible,’ he said.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Looking back as they drove out of the forum, Chelifer saw that
    his mother, faithful to her vegetarian principles, was throwing
    down into the den of cats bread and cold potatoes. In the evening
    he imagined she would come again. She had not taken long to
    find her Roman occupation.</p>

    <h2>CHAPTER IX</h2>

    <p class='pindent'>The funeral was not due to take place before sunset. The
    bearers, the choristers, the sexton, the priest himself, most likely,
    were all in the fields, picking the grapes. They had something
    more important to do, while the light lasted, than to bury people.
    Let the dead bury their dead. The living were there to make
    wine.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Mr. Cardan sat alone in the empty church. Alone; what had
    once been Grace Elver lay, coffined, on a bier in the middle of the
    aisle. That did not count as company; it was just so much stuff
    in a box. His red knobbly face was as though frozen into stillness,
    all its gaiety, its twinkling mobility were gone. It might have
    been the face of a dead man, of one of the dead whose business it is
    to bury the dead. He sat there grim and stony, leaning forward,
    his chin in his hand, his elbow on his knee.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Three thousand six hundred and fifty days more, he was
    thinking; that is, if I live another ten years. Three thousand six
    hundred and fifty, and then the end of everything, the tunnelling
    worms.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>There are such horrible ways of dying, he thought. Once,
    years ago, he had a beautiful grey Angora cat. She ate too many
    black-beetles in the kitchen and died vomiting shreds of her shard-torn
    stomach. He often thought of that cat. One might die like
    that oneself, coughing up one’s vitals.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Not that one eats many black-beetles, of course. But there
    is always putrid fish. The effects are not so very different.
    Wretched moron! he thought, looking at the coffin. It had been
    a disgusting sort of death. Pains, vomiting, collapse, coma, then
    the coffin—and now the busy ferments of putrefaction and the
    worms. Not a very dignified or inspiring conclusion. No
    speeches, no consoling serenities, no Little Nells or Paul Dombeys.
    The nearest approach to the Dickensian had been when, in a brief
    spell of lucidity, she asked him about the bears he was going to
    give her after they were married.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Will they be grown up?’ she asked. ‘Or puppies?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Puppies,’ he answered, and she had smiled with pleasure.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Those had been almost the only articulate words she had uttered.
    Through that long death-agony they were the only witnesses to the
    existence of her soul. For the rest of the time she had been no
    more than a sick body, mindlessly crying and muttering. The
    tragedy of bodily suffering and extinction has no catharsis. Punctually
    it runs its dull, degrading course, act by act to the conclusion.
    It ennobles neither the sufferer nor the contemplator. Only the
    tragedy of the spirit can liberate and uplift. But the greatest
    tragedy of the spirit is that sooner or later it succumbs to the flesh.
    Sooner or later every soul is stifled by the sick body; sooner or later
    there are no more thoughts, but only pain and vomiting and stupor.
    The tragedies of the spirit are mere struttings and posturings on
    the margin of life, and the spirit itself is only an accidental exuberance,
    the products of spare vital energy, like the feathers on the
    head of a hoopoo or the innumerable populations of useless and
    foredoomed spermatozoa. The spirit has no significance; there
    is only the body. When it is young, the body is beautiful and
    strong. It grows old, its joints creak, it becomes dry and smelly;
    it breaks down, the life goes out of it and it rots away. However
    lovely the feathers on a bird’s head, they perish with it; and the
    spirit, which is a lovelier ornament than any, perishes too. The
    farce is hideous, thought Mr. Cardan, and in the worst of bad
    taste.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Fools do not perceive that the farce is a farce. They are the
    more blessed. Wise men perceive it and take pains not to think
    about it. Therein lies their wisdom. They indulge themselves
    in all the pleasures, of the spirit as of the body—and especially in
    those of the spirit, since they are by far the more varied, charming
    and delightful—and when the time comes they resign themselves
    with the best grace they can muster to the decay of the body and
    the extinction of its spiritual part. Meanwhile, however, they
    do not think too much of death—it is an unexhilarating theme;
    they do not insist too much upon the farcical nature of the drama
    in which they are playing, for fear that they should become too
    much disgusted with their parts to get any amusement out of the
    piece at all.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>The most ludicrous comedies are the comedies about people
    who preach one thing and practise another, who make imposing
    claims and lamentably fail to fulfil them. We preach
    immortality and we practise death. Tartuffe and Volpone are
    not in it.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>The wise man does not think of death lest it should spoil his
    pleasures. But there are times when the worms intrude too insistently
    to be ignored. Death forces itself sometimes upon the
    mind, and then it is hard to take much pleasure in anything.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>This coffin, for instance—how can a man take pleasure in the
    beauty of the church in which this boxful of decaying stuff is
    lying? What can be more delightful than to look up the aisle of a
    great church and see at the end of a long dark vista of round-headed
    arches a brightly illumined segment of the drum of the cupola—the
    horizontal circle contrasting harmoniously with the perpendicular
    half-circles of the arches? There is nothing lovelier among
    all the works of man. But the coffin lies here under the arches,
    reminding the connoisseur of beauty that there is nothing but the
    body and that the body suffers degradingly, dies and is eaten by
    maggots.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Mr. Cardan wondered how he would die. Slowly or suddenly?
    After long pain? Intelligent, still human? Or an idiot, a
    moaning animal? He would die poor, now, in any case. Friends
    would club together and send him a few pounds every now and
    then. Poor old Cardan, can’t let him die in the workhouse.
    Must send him five pounds. What a bore! Extraordinary how
    he manages to last so long! But he was always a tough old devil.
    Poor old Cardan!</p>

    <p class='pindent'>A door banged; in the hollow echoing church there was a
    sound of footsteps. It was the sacristan. He came to tell
    Mr. Cardan that they would soon be ready to begin. They
    had hurried back from the fields on purpose. The grapes were
    not so plentiful nor of quite such good quality as they had been
    last year. But still, one thanked God for His mercies, such as
    they were.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Blessed are the fools, thought Mr. Cardan, for they shall see
    nothing. Or perhaps they do see and, seeing, nevertheless comfortingly
    believe in future compensations and the justice of eternity.
    In either case—not seeing, or seeing but believing—they are fools.
    Still, believing is probably the best solution of all, Mr. Cardan
    went on to reflect. For it allows one to see and not to ignore. It
    permits one to accept the facts and yet justify them. For a believer
    the presence of a coffin or two would not interfere with the appreciation
    of Sammicheli’s architecture.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>The bearers filed in, bringing with them from the fields a
    healthy smell of sweat. They were dressed for the occasion in
    garments that ought, no doubt, to have been surplices, but which
    were, in point of fact, rather dirty and crumpled white dust-coats.
    They looked like a cricket eleven entirely composed of umpires.
    After the bearers came the priest, followed by a miniature umpire
    in a dust-coat so short that it did not hide his bare knees. The
    service began. The priest reeled off his Latin formulas as though
    for a wager; the bearers, in ragged and tuneless unison, bawled
    back at him the incomprehensible responses. During the longer
    prayers they talked to one another about the vintage. The boy
    scratched first his head, then his posterior, finally picked his nose.
    The priest prayed so fast that all the words fused together and
    became one word. Mr. Cardan wondered why the Catholic
    Church did not authorize prayer wheels. A simple little electric
    motor doing six or eight hundred revolutions a minute would get
    through a quite astonishing amount of pious work in a day and cost
    much less than a priest.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Baa baba, baa baa, Boo-oo-baa,’ bleated the priest.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Boooo-baa,’ came back from the bawling flock.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Not ceasing for a moment to pick his nose, the diminutive umpire,
    who seemed to know his part as perfectly as a trained dog in a music
    hall, handed the priest a censer. Waving it as he went, and rattling
    off his pious Latin, he walked round and round the bier. Symbolic
    and religious perfume! It had smoked in the stable of Bethlehem,
    in the midst of the ammoniac smell of the beasts, the sign and
    symbol of the spirit. The blue smoke floated up and was lost along
    the wind. On the surface of the earth the beasts unremittingly
    propagate their kind; the whole earth is a morass of living flesh.
    The smell of it hangs warm and heavy over all. Here and there
    the incense burns; its smoke soon vanishes. The smell of the
    beasts remains.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Baa baba,’ went the priest.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Baa,’ the choristers retorted, a fifth lower down the scale.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>The boy produced water and a kind of whisk. Once more the
    priest walked round the bier, sprinkling the water from the end of
    the wetted whisk; the little umpire followed in his train, holding
    up the tail of his outer garment. The bearers, meanwhile, talked
    to one another in serious whispers about the grapes.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Sometimes, Mr. Cardan thought, the spirit plays its part so
    solemnly and well that one cannot help believing in its reality and
    ultimate significance. A ritual gravely performed is overwhelmingly
    convincing, for the moment at any rate. But let it be performed
    casually and carelessly by people who are not thinking of
    what the rite is meant to symbolize; one perceives that there is
    nothing behind the symbols, that it is only the acting that matters—the
    judicious acting of the body—and that the body, the doomed,
    decaying body, is the one, appalling fact.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>The service was over; the bearers picked up the coffin and
    carried it to the hearse that stood at the church door. The priest
    beckoned to Mr. Cardan to follow him into the sacristy. There,
    while the little umpire put away his censer and the whisk, he
    presented his bill. Mr. Cardan paid.</p>

    <div><span class='pageno' title='339' id='Page_339'></span><h1>PART V<br/> <span class='sub-head'>CONCLUSIONS</span></h1></div>

    <h2>CHAPTER I</h2>

    <p class='pindent'>‘What are you thinking of?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Nothing,’ said Calamy.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Yes, you were. You must have been thinking about something.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Nothing in particular,’ he repeated.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Tell me,’ Mary insisted. ‘I want to know.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Well, if you really want to know,’ Calamy began slowly .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>But she interrupted him. ‘And why did you hold up your hand
    like that? And spread out the fingers? I could see it, you know;
    against the window.’ Pitch dark it was in the room, but beyond
    the unshuttered windows was a starlit night.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Calamy laughed—a rather embarrassed laugh. ‘Oh, you saw
    it, did you—the hand? Well, as a matter of fact, it was precisely
    about my hand that I was thinking.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘About your hand?’ said Mary incredulously. ‘That seems
    a queer thing to think about.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘But interesting if you think about it hard enough.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Your hands,’ she said softly, in another voice, ‘your hands.
    When they touch me .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.’ With a feminine movement of gratitude,
    of thanks for a benefit received, she pressed herself more closely
    against him; in the darkness she kissed him. ‘I love you too much,’
    she whispered, ‘too much.’ And at the moment it was almost true.
    The strong complete spirit, she had written in her note-book, must
    be able to love with fury, savagely, mindlessly. Not without pride,
    she had found herself complete and strong. Once, at a dinner
    party, she had been taken down by a large black and lemon coloured
    Argentine; unfolding his napkin, he had opened the evening’s
    conversation, in that fantastic trans-Pyrenean French which was
    his only substitute for the Castilian, by saying, with a roll of his
    black eyes and a flashing ivory smile: ‘Jé vois qué vous avez du
    temmperramenk.’ ‘Oh, à revendre,’ she had answered gaily,
    throwing herself into the light Parisian part. How marvellously
    amusing! But that was Life—Life all over. She had brought
    the incident into a short story, long ago. But the Argentine had
    looked with an expert’s eye; he was right. ‘I love you too much,’
    she whispered in the darkness. Yes, it was true, it was nearly true,
    at the moment, in the circumstances. She took his hand and kissed
    it. ‘That’s all <span class='it'>I</span> think about your hand,’ she said.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Calamy allowed his hand to be kissed, and as soon as it was
    decently possible gently withdrew it. Invisibly, in the darkness,
    he made a little grimace of impatience. He was no longer interested
    in kisses, at the moment. ‘Yes,’ he said meditatively, ‘that’s
    one way of thinking of my hand, that’s one way in which it exists
    and is real. Certainly. And that was what I was thinking about—all
    the different ways in which these five fingers’—he held them
    up again, splayed out, against the window’s oblong of paler darkness—‘have
    reality and exist. All the different ways,’ he repeated
    slowly. ‘If you think of that, even for five minutes, you find
    yourself plunged up to the eyes in the most portentous mysteries.’
    He was silent for a moment; then added in a very serious voice.
    ‘And I believe that if one could stand the strain of thinking really
    hard about one thing—this hand, for example—really hard for
    several days, or weeks, or months, one might be able to burrow
    one’s way right through the mystery and really get at something—some
    kind of truth, some explanation.’ He paused, frowning.
    Down and down, through the obscurity, he was thinking. Slowly,
    painfully, like Milton’s Devil, pushing his way through chaos; in
    the end, one might emerge into the light, to see the universe, sphere
    within sphere, hanging from the floor of heaven. But it would be
    a slow, laborious process; one would need time, one would need
    freedom. Above everything, freedom.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Why don’t you think about me?’ Mary Thriplow asked. She
    propped herself up on one elbow and leaned over him; with her
    other hand she ruffled his hair. ‘Don’t I bear thinking about?’
    she asked. She had a fistful of his thick hair in her hand; softly
    she tugged at it, testingly, as though she were preparing for something
    worse, were assuring her grip for a more violent pull. She
    felt a desire to hurt him. Even in her arms, she was thinking,
    he escaped her, he simply wasn’t there. ‘Don’t I bear thinking
    about?’ she repeated, tugging a little harder at his hair.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Calamy said nothing. The truth was, he was reflecting, that she
    didn’t bear thinking about. Like a good many other things. All
    one’s daily life was a skating over thin ice, was a scampering of
    water-beetles across the invisible skin of depths. Stamp a little
    too hard, lean a shade too heavily and you were through, you were
    floundering in a dangerous and unfamiliar element. This love
    business, for example—it simply couldn’t be thought of; it could
    only support one on condition that one never stopped to think.
    But it was necessary to think, necessary to break through and sink
    into the depths. And yet, insanely and desperately, one still went
    skating on.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Do you love me?’ asked Mary.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Of course,’ he said; but the tone of his voice did not carry
    much conviction.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Menacingly she tugged at the tuft of hair she held twined round
    her fingers. It angered her that he should escape her, that he
    should not give himself up completely to her. And this resentful
    feeling that he did not love her enough produced in her a complementary
    conviction that she loved him too much. Her anger
    combined with her physical gratitude to make her feel, for the
    moment, peculiarly passionate. She found herself all at once playing
    the part of the <span class='it'>grande amoureuse</span>, the impassioned de Lespinasse,
    playing it spontaneously and without the least difficulty. ‘I could
    hate you,’ she said resentfully, ‘for making me love you so much.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘And what about me?’ said Calamy, thinking of his freedom.
    ‘Haven’t I a right to hate too?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘No. Because you don’t love so much.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘But that’s not the question,’ said Calamy, neglecting to record
    his protest against this damning impeachment. ‘One doesn’t
    resent love for its own sake, but for the sake of what it interferes
    with.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Oh, I see,’ said Mary bitterly. She was too deeply wounded
    even to desire to pull his hair. She turned her back on him. ‘I’m
    sorry I should have got in the way of your important occupations,’
    she said in her most sarcastic voice. ‘Such as thinking about your
    hand.’ She laughed derisively. There was a long silence.
    Calamy made no attempt to break it; he was piqued by this
    derisive treatment of a subject which, for him, was serious, was
    in some sort sacred. It was Mary who first spoke.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Will you tell me, then, what you were thinking?’ she asked
    submissively, turning back towards him. When one loves, one
    swallows one’s pride and surrenders. ‘Will you tell me?’ she
    repeated, leaning over him. She took one of his hands and began
    to kiss it, then suddenly bit one of his fingers so hard that Calamy
    cried out in pain.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Why do you make me so unhappy?’ she asked between
    clenched teeth. She saw herself, as she spoke the words, lying
    face downward on her bed, desperately sobbing. It needs a great
    spirit to be greatly unhappy.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Make you unhappy?’ echoed Calamy in a voice of irritation;
    he was still smarting with the pain of that bite. ‘But I don’t.
    I make you uncommonly happy.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘You make me miserable,’ she answered.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Well, in that case,’ said Calamy, ‘I’d better go away and leave
    you in peace.’ He slipped his arm from under her shoulders, as
    though he were really preparing to go.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>But Mary enfolded him in her arms. ‘No, no,’ she implored.
    ‘Don’t go. You mustn’t be cross with me. I’m sorry. I behaved
    abominably. Tell me, please, what you were thinking about your
    hand. I really am interested. Really, really.’ She spoke eagerly,
    childishly, like the little girl at the Royal Institution lecture.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Calamy couldn’t help laughing. ‘You’ve succeeded in rather
    damping my enthusiasm for that subject,’ he said. ‘I’d find it
    difficult to begin now, in cold blood.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Please, please,’ Mary insisted. Wronged, it was she who asked
    pardon, she who cajoled. When one loves .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘You’ve made it almost impossible to talk anything but nonsense,’
    Calamy objected. But in the end he allowed himself to be persuaded.
    Embarrassed, rather awkwardly—for the spiritual atmosphere
    in which these ideas had been ruminated was dissipated, and
    it was in the void, so to speak, in the empty cold that his thoughts
    now gasped for breath—he began his exposition. But gradually,
    as he spoke, the mood returned; he became at home once more
    with what he was saying. Mary listened with a fixed attention
    of which, even in the darkness, he was somehow conscious.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Well, you see,’ he started hesitatingly, ‘it’s like this. I
    was thinking of all the different ways a thing can exist—my hand,
    for example.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I see,’ said Mary Thriplow sympathetically and intelligently.
    She was almost too anxious to prove that she was listening, that she
    was understanding everything; she saw before there was anything
    to see.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘It’s extraordinary,’ Calamy went on, ‘what a lot of different
    modes of existence a thing has, when you come to think about it.
    And the more you think, the more obscure and mysterious everything
    becomes. What seemed solid vanishes; what was obvious
    and comprehensible becomes utterly mysterious. Gulfs begin
    opening all around you—more and more abysses, as though the
    ground were splitting in an earthquake. It gives one a strange
    sense of insecurity, of being in the dark. But I still believe that,
    if one went on thinking long enough and hard enough, one might
    somehow come through, get out on the other side of the obscurity.
    But into what, precisely into what? That’s the question.’ He
    was silent for a moment. If one were free, he thought, one could
    go exploring into that darkness. But the flesh was weak; under
    the threat of that delicious torture it turned coward and
    traitor.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Well?’ said Mary at last. She moved closer to him, lightly,
    her lips brushed across his cheek. She ran her hand softly over his
    shoulder and along his arm. ‘Go on.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Very well,’ he said in a business-like voice, moving a little
    away from her as he spoke. He held up his hand once more against
    the window. ‘Look,’ he said. ‘It’s just a shape that interrupts
    the light. To a child who has not yet learned to interpret what he
    sees, that’s all it would be, just a shaped blotch of colour, no more
    significant than one of those coloured targets representing a man’s
    head and shoulders that one learns shooting on. But now, suppose
    I try to consider the thing as a physicist.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Quite,’ said Mary Thriplow; and from the movement of a
    floating tress of her hair which brushed against his shoulder he
    knew that she was nodding her head.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Well then,’ Calamy went on, ‘I have to imagine an almost
    inconceivable number of atoms, each consisting of a greater or lesser
    number of units of negative electricity whirling several million times
    a minute round a nucleus of positive electricity. The vibrations of
    the atoms lying near the surface sift out, so to speak, the electro-magnetic
    radiations which fall upon them, permitting only those
    waves to reach our eyes which give us the sensation of a brownish-pink
    colour. In passing it may be remarked that the behaviour of
    light is satisfactorily explained according to one theory of electro-dynamics,
    while the behaviour of the electrons in the atom can only
    be explained on a theory that is entirely inconsistent with it. Inside
    the atom, they tell us now, electrons move from one orbit to another
    without taking any time to accomplish their journey and without
    covering any space. Indeed, within the atom there is neither space
    nor time. And so on and so on. I have to take most of this on
    trust, I’m afraid, for I understand next to nothing about these
    things. Only enough to make me feel rather dizzy when I begin
    to think about them.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Yes, dizzy,’ said Mary, ‘that’s the word. Dizzy.’ She
    made a prolonged buzzing over the z’s.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Well then, here are two ways already in which my hand
    exists,’ Calamy went on. ‘Then there’s the chemical way.
    These atoms consisting of more or fewer electrons whizzing round
    a nucleus of greater or lesser charge are atoms of different elements
    that build themselves up in certain architectural patterns into
    complicated molecules.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Sympathetic and intelligent, Mary echoed: ‘Molecules.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Now if, like Cranmer, I were to put my right hand into the fire,
    to punish it for having done something evil or unworthy (words, by
    the way, which haven’t much in common with chemistry), if I were
    to put my hand in the fire, these molecules would uncombine themselves
    into their constituent atoms, which would then proceed to
    build themselves up again into other molecules. But this leads me
    on at once to a set of entirely different realities. For if I were to
    put my hand in the fire, I should feel pain; and unless, like Cranmer,
    I made an enormous effort of will to keep it there, I should withdraw
    it; or rather it would withdraw itself almost without my
    knowledge and before I was aware. For I am alive, and this hand
    is part of a living being, the first law of whose existence is to preserve
    its life. Being alive, this hand of mine, if it were burnt, would
    set about trying to repair itself. Seen by a biologist, it reveals
    itself as a collection of cells, having each its appointed function,
    and existing harmoniously together, never trespassing upon one
    another, never proliferating into wild adventures of growth, but
    living, dying and growing to one end—that the whole which they
    compose may fulfil its purpose—and as though in accordance with
    a preordained plan. Say that the hand is burnt. From all round
    the burn the healthy cells would breed out of themselves new
    cells to fill in and cover the damaged places.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘How wonderful life is!’ said Mary Thriplow. ‘Life .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Cranmer’s hand,’ Calamy went on, ‘had done an ignoble thing.
    The hand is part, not merely of a living being, but of a being that
    knows good and evil. This hand of mine can do good things and
    bad things. It has killed a man, for example; it has written all
    manner of words; it has helped a man who was hurt; it has
    touched your body.’ He laid his hand on her breast; she started,
    she trembled involuntarily under his caress. He ought to think
    that rather flattering, oughtn’t he? It was a symbol of his power
    over her—of her power, alas, over him. ‘And when it touches
    your body,’ he went on, ‘it touches also your mind. My hand
    moves like this, and it moves through your consciousness as well as
    here, across your skin. And it’s my mind that orders it to move;
    it brings your body into my mind. It exists in mind; it has reality
    as a part of my soul and a part of yours.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Miss Thriplow couldn’t help reflecting that there was, in all
    this, the stuff for a very deep digression in one of her novels.
    “This thoughtful young writer .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.” would be quoted from the
    reviewers on the dust-cover of her next book.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Go on,’ she said.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Calamy went on. ‘And so these,’ he said, ‘are some of the
    ways—and there are plenty more, of course, besides—these are
    some of the ways in which my hand exists and is real. This shape
    which interrupts the light—it is enough to think of it for five minutes
    to perceive that it exists simultaneously in a dozen parallel worlds.
    It exists as electrical charges; as chemical molecules; as living
    cells; as part of a moral being, the instrument of good and evil;
    in the physical world and in mind. And from this one goes on
    to ask, inevitably, what relationship exists between these different
    modes of being. What is there in common between life and
    chemistry; between good and evil and electrical charges; between
    a collection of cells and the consciousness of a caress? It’s here
    that the gulfs begin to open. For there isn’t any connection—that
    one can see, at any rate. Universe lies on the top of universe,
    layer after layer, distinct and separate .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Like a Neapolitan ice,’ Mary’s mind flew at once to the fantastic
    and unexpected comparison. “This witty young writer .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.”
    That was already on her dust-covers.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Calamy laughed. ‘All right,’ he agreed. ‘Like a Neapolitan
    ice, if you like. What’s true in the chocolate layer, at the bottom
    of the ice, doesn’t hold in the vanilla at the top. And a lemon
    truth is different from a strawberry truth. And each one has just
    as much right to exist and to call itself real as every other. And
    you can’t explain one in terms of the others. Certainly you can’t
    explain the vanilla in terms of any of the lower layers—you can’t
    explain mind as mere life, as chemistry, as physics. That at least
    is one thing that’s perfectly obvious and self-evident.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Obvious,’ Mary agreed. ‘And what’s the result of it all?
    I really don’t see.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Neither do I,’ said Calamy, speaking through an explosion of
    melancholy laughter. ‘The only hope,’ he went on slowly, ‘is
    that perhaps, if you went on thinking long enough and hard enough,
    you might arrive at an explanation of the chocolate and the lemon
    by the vanilla. Perhaps it’s really all vanilla, all mind, all spirit.
    The rest is only apparent, an illusion. But one has no right to say
    so until one has thought a long time, in freedom.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘In freedom?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘The mind must be open, unperturbed, empty of irrelevant
    things, quiet. There’s no room for thoughts in a half-shut,
    cluttered mind. And thoughts won’t enter a noisy mind; they’re
    shy, they remain in their obscure hiding-places below the surface,
    where they can’t be got at, so long as the mind is full and noisy.
    Most of us pass through life without knowing that they’re there
    at all. If one wants to lure them out, one must clear a space for
    them, one must open the mind wide and wait. And there must
    be no irrelevant preoccupations prowling around the doors. One
    must free oneself of those.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I suppose I’m one of the irrelevant preoccupations,’ said Mary
    Thriplow, after a little pause.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Calamy laughed, but did not deny it.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘If that’s so,’ said Mary, ‘why did you make love to me?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Calamy did not reply. Why indeed? He had often asked that
    question himself.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I think it would be best,’ she said, after a silence, ‘if we were
    to make an end.’ She would go away, she would grieve in solitude.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Make an end?’ Calamy repeated. He desired it, of course,
    above everything—to make an end, to be free. But he found
    himself adding, with a kind of submarine laughter below the surface
    of his voice: ‘Do you think you <span class='it'>can</span> make an end?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Why not?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Suppose I don’t allow you to?’ Did she imagine, then, that
    she wasn’t in his power, that he couldn’t make her obey his will
    whenever he desired? ‘I <span class='it'>don’t</span> allow you,’ he said, and his voice
    quivered with the rising mirth. He bent over her and began to
    kiss her on the mouth; with his hands he held and caressed her.
    What an insanity, he said to himself.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘No, no.’ Mary struggled a little; but in the end she allowed
    herself to be overcome. She lay still, trembling, like one who
    has been tortured on the rack.</p>

    <h2>CHAPTER II</h2>

    <p class='pindent'>On their return, somewhat low-spirited, from Montefiascone,
    Mrs. Aldwinkle and her party found Mary Thriplow alone in
    the palace.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘And Calamy?’ Mrs. Aldwinkle inquired.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘He’s gone into the mountains,’ said Miss Thriplow in a serious,
    matter-of-fact voice.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Why?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘He felt like that,’ Mary answered. ‘He wanted to be alone to
    think. I understand it so well. The prospect of your return filled
    him almost with terror. He went off two or three days ago.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Into the mountains?’ echoed Mrs. Aldwinkle. ‘Is he sleeping
    in the woods, or in a cave, or something of that kind?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘He’s taken a room in a peasant’s cottage on the road up to
    the marble quarries. It’s a lovely place.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘This sounds most interesting,’ said Mr. Cardan. ‘I must
    really climb up and have a look at him.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I’m sure he’d rather you didn’t,’ said Miss Thriplow. ‘He
    wants to be left alone. I understand it so well,’ she repeated.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Mr. Cardan looked at her curiously; her face expressed a bright
    and serious serenity. ‘I’m surprised that you too don’t retire
    from the world,’ he said, twinkling. He had not felt as cheerful
    as this since before the dismal day of poor Grace’s funeral.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Miss Thriplow smiled a Christian smile. ‘You think it’s a
    joke,’ she said, shaking her head. ‘But it isn’t really, you
    know.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I’m sure it isn’t,’ Mr. Cardan made haste to protest. ‘And
    believe me, I never meant to imply that it was. Never, on my
    word. I merely said—quite seriously, I assure you—that I was
    surprised that you too .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Well, you see, it doesn’t seem to me necessary to go away
    bodily,’ Miss Thriplow explained. ‘It’s always seemed to me
    that one can live the hermit’s life, if one wants to, in the heart of
    London, anywhere.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Quite,’ said Mr. Cardan. ‘You’re perfectly right.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I think he might have waited till I came back,’ said Mrs. Aldwinkle
    rather resentfully. ‘The least he could have done was to
    leave a note.’ She looked at Miss Thriplow angrily, as though it
    were she who were to blame for Calamy’s impoliteness. ‘Well, I
    must go and get out of my dusty clothes,’ she added crossly, and
    walked away to her room. Her irritation was the disguise and
    public manifestation of a profound depression. They’re all going,
    she was thinking, they’re all slipping away. First Chelifer, now
    Calamy. Like all the rest. Mournfully she looked back over her
    life. Everybody, everything had always slipped away from her.
    She had always missed all the really important, exciting things;
    they had invariably happened, somehow, just round the corner,
    out of her sight. The days were so short, so few now. Death
    approached, approached. Why had Cardan brought that horrible
    imbecile creature to die in front of her like that? She didn’t want
    to be reminded of death. Mrs. Aldwinkle shuddered. I’m
    getting old, she thought; and the little clock on the mantel-piece,
    ticking away in the silence of her huge room, took up the refrain:
    Getting old, getting old, getting old, it repeated again and again,
    endlessly. Getting old—Mrs. Aldwinkle looked at herself in the
    glass—and that electric massage machine hadn’t arrived. True, it
    was on its way; but it would be weeks before it got here. The
    posts were so slow. Everything conspired against her. If she
    had had it before, if she’d looked younger .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. who knew?
    Getting old, getting old, repeated the little clock. In a couple of
    days from now Chelifer would be going back to England; he’d
    go away, he’d live apart from her, live such a wonderful, beautiful
    life. She’d miss it all. And Calamy had already gone; what
    was he doing, sitting there in the mountains? He was thinking
    wonderful thoughts, thoughts that might hold the secret she had
    always been seeking and had never found, thoughts that might bring
    the consolation and tranquillity of which she always so sorely stood
    in need. She was missing them, she’d never know them. Getting
    old, getting old. She took off her hat and tossed it on to the bed.
    It seemed to her that she was the unhappiest woman in the world.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>That evening, while she was brushing Mrs. Aldwinkle’s hair,
    Irene, braving the dangers of Aunt Lilian’s terrifying fun, screwed
    up her courage to say: ‘I can never be grateful enough to you,
    Auntie, for having talked to me about Hovenden.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘What about him?’ asked Mrs. Aldwinkle, from whose mind
    the painful events of the last few weeks had quite obliterated such
    trivial memories.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Irene blushed with embarrassment. This was a question she
    had not anticipated. Was it really possible that Aunt Lilian could
    have forgotten those momentous and epoch-making words of hers?
    ‘Why,’ she began stammering, ‘what you said about .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. I mean
    .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. when you said that he looked as though .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. well, as though
    he liked me.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Oh yes,’ said Mrs. Aldwinkle without interest.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Don’t you remember?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Yes, yes,’ Mrs. Aldwinkle nodded. ‘What about it?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Well,’ Irene went on, still painfully embarrassed, ‘you see .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
    that made me .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. that made me pay attention, if you understand.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Hm,’ said Mrs. Aldwinkle. There was a silence. Getting
    old, getting old, repeated the little clock remorselessly.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Irene leaned forward and suddenly boiled over with confidences.
    ‘I love him so much, Aunt Lilian,’ she said, speaking very rapidly,
    ‘so much, so much. It’s the real thing this time. And he loves
    me too. And we’re going to get married at the New Year, quite
    quietly; no fuss, no crowds shoving in on what isn’t their business;
    quietly and sensibly in a registry office. And after that we’re
    going in the Velox to .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘What are you talking about?’ said Mrs. Aldwinkle in a furious
    voice, and she turned round on her niece a face expressive of such
    passionate anger that Irene drew back, not merely astonished, but
    positively afraid. ‘You don’t mean to tell me,’ Mrs. Aldwinkle
    began; but she could not find the words to continue. ‘What
    have you two young fools been thinking about?’ she got out at
    last.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. old, getting old; the remorseless ticking made itself heard
    in every silence.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>From being merry and excited in its childishness Irene’s face
    had become astonished and miserable. She was pale, her lips
    trembled a little as she spoke. ‘But I thought you’d be glad,
    Aunt Lilian,’ she said. ‘I thought you’d be glad.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Glad because you’re making fools of yourselves?’ asked
    Mrs. Aldwinkle, savagely snorting.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘But it was you who first suggested,’ Irene began.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Mrs. Aldwinkle cut her short, before she could say any more,
    with a brusqueness that might have revealed to a more practised
    psychologist than Irene her consciousness of being in the wrong.
    ‘Absurd,’ she said. ‘I suppose you‘re going to tell me,’ she
    went on sarcastically, ‘that it was I who told you to marry him.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I know you didn’t,’ said Irene.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘There!’ Mrs. Aldwinkle’s tone was triumphant.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘But you did say you wondered why I wasn’t in love .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Bah,’ said Aunt Lilian, ‘I was just making fun. Calf loves .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘But why shouldn’t I marry him?’ asked Irene. ‘If I love
    him and he loves me. Why shouldn’t I?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Why shouldn’t she? Yes, that was an awkward question.
    Getting old, getting old, muttered the clock in the brief ensuing
    silence. Perhaps that was half the answer. Getting old! they
    were all going; first Chelifer, then Calamy, now Irene. Getting
    old, getting old; soon she’d be quite alone. And it wasn’t only
    that. It was also her pride that was hurt, her love of dominion
    that suffered. Irene had been her slave; had worshipped her,
    taken her word as law, her opinions as gospel truth. Now she was
    transferring her allegiance. Mrs. Aldwinkle was losing a subject—losing
    her to a more powerful rival. It was intolerable. ‘Why
    shouldn’t you marry him?’ Mrs. Aldwinkle repeated the phrase
    ironically two or three times, while she hunted for the answer.
    ‘Why shouldn’t you marry him?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Why shouldn’t I?’ Irene asked again. There were tears in
    her eyes; but however unhappy she might look, there was something
    determined and indomitable in her attitude, something
    obstinate in her expression and her tone of voice. Mrs. Aldwinkle
    had reason to fear her rival.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Because you’re too young,’ she said at last. It was a very
    feeble answer; but she had been unable to think of a better one.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘But, Aunt Lilian, don’t you remember? You always said
    that people ought to marry young. I remember so well, one time,
    when we talked about Juliet being only fourteen when she first
    saw Romeo, that you said .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘That has nothing to do with it,’ said Mrs. Aldwinkle, cutting
    short her niece’s mnemonic display. Irene’s memory, Mrs. Aldwinkle
    had often had reason to complain, was really too good.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘But if you said .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.’ Irene began again.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Romeo and Juliet have nothing to do with you and Hovenden,’
    retorted Mrs. Aldwinkle. ‘I repeat: you’re too young.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I’m nineteen.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Eighteen.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Practically nineteen,’ Irene insisted. ‘My birthday’s in
    December.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Marry in haste and repent at leisure,’ said Mrs. Aldwinkle,
    making use of any missile, even a proverb, that came ready to hand.
    ‘At the end of six months you’ll come back howling and complaining
    and asking me to get you out of the mess.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘But why should I?’ asked Irene. ‘We love one another.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘They all say that. You don’t know your own minds.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘But we do.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Mrs. Aldwinkle suddenly changed her tactics. ‘And what
    makes you so anxious all at once to run away from me?’ she asked.
    ‘Can’t you bear to stay with me a moment longer? Am I
    so intolerable and odious and .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. and .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. brutal and .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
    She clawed at the air. ‘Do you hate me so much that .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Aunt Lilian!’ protested Irene, who had begun to cry in
    earnest.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Mrs. Aldwinkle, with that tactlessness, that lack of measure that
    were characteristic of her, went on piling question upon rhetorical
    question, until in the end she completely spoiled the effect she
    had meant to achieve, exaggerating into ludicrousness what might
    otherwise have been touching. ‘Can’t you bear me? Have I
    ill-treated you? Tell me. Have I bullied you, or scolded you,
    or .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. or not given you enough to eat? Tell me.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘How can you talk like that, Aunt Lilian?’ Irene dabbed her
    eyes with a corner of her dressing-gown. ‘How can you say that
    I don’t love you? And you were always telling me that I ought
    to get married,’ she added, breaking out into fresh tears.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘How can I say that you don’t love me?’ echoed Mrs. Aldwinkle.
    ‘But is it true that you’re longing to leave me as soon as
    possible? Is that true or not? I merely ask what the reason
    is, that’s all.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘But the reason is that we want to get married; we love each
    other.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Or that you hate me,’ Mrs. Aldwinkle persisted.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘But I don’t hate you, Aunt Lilian. How can you say such a
    thing? You know I love you.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘And yet you’re anxious to run away from me as fast as you
    possibly can,’ said Mrs. Aldwinkle. ‘And I shall be left all alone,
    all alone.’ Her voice trembled; she shut her eyes, she contorted
    her face in an effort to keep it closed and rigid. Between her
    eyelids the tears came welling out. ‘All alone,’ she repeated
    brokenly. Getting old, said the little clock on the mantel-piece,
    getting old, getting old.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Irene knelt down beside her, took her hands between her own
    and kissed them, pressed them against her tear-wet face. ‘Aunt
    Lilian,’ she begged, ‘Aunt Lilian.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Mrs. Aldwinkle went on sobbing.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Don’t cry,’ said Irene, crying herself. She imagined that
    she alone was the cause of Aunt Lilian’s unhappiness. In reality,
    she was only the pretext; Mrs. Aldwinkle was weeping over her
    whole life, weeping at the approach of death. In that first moment
    of agonized sympathy and self-reproach, Irene was on the point of
    declaring that she would give up Hovenden, that she would spend
    all her life with her Aunt Lilian. But something held her back.
    Obscurely she was certain that it wouldn’t do, that it was impossible,
    that it would even be wrong. She loved Aunt Lilian and she loved
    Hovenden. In a way she loved Aunt Lilian more than Hovenden,
    now. But something in her that looked prophetically forward,
    something that had come through innumerable lives, out of the
    obscure depths of time, to dwell within her, held her back. The
    conscious and individual part of her spirit inclined towards Aunt
    Lilian. But consciousness and individuality—how precariously,
    how irrelevantly almost, they flowered out of that ancient root of
    life planted in the darkness of her being! The flower was for
    Aunt Lilian, the root for Hovenden.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘But you won’t be all alone,’ she protested. ‘We shall constantly
    be with you. You’ll come and stay with us.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>The assurance did not seem to bring much consolation to Mrs.
    Aldwinkle. She went on crying. The clock ticked away as
    busily as ever.</p>

    <h2>CHAPTER III</h2>

    <p class='pindent'>In the course of the last few days the entries in Miss Thriplow’s
    note-book had changed their character. From being amorous
    they had turned mystical. Savage and mindless passion was replaced
    by quiet contemplation. De Lespinasse had yielded to
    de Guyon.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Do you remember, darling Jim,’ she wrote, ‘how, when we
    were ten, we used to discuss what was the sin against the Holy
    Ghost? I remember we agreed that using the altar as a W.C.
    was probably the unforgivable sin. It’s a great pity that it isn’t,
    for then it would be so extremely easy to avoid committing it.
    No, I’m afraid it’s not quite so straightforward as that, the sin
    against the Holy Ghost. And it’s most perilously easy to fall into
    it. Stifling the voices inside you, filling the mind with so much
    earthy rubbish that God has no room to enter it, not giving the
    spirit its fair chance—that’s the sin against the Holy Ghost.
    And it’s unforgivable because it’s irremediable. Last-minute
    repentances are no good. The sin and the corresponding virtue
    are affairs of a lifetime. And almost everybody commits the sin;
    they die unforgiven, and at once they begin again another life.
    Only when they’ve lived in the virtue of the Holy Ghost are they
    forgiven, let off the pains of life and allowed to sink into unity with
    All. Isn’t that the meaning of the text? It’s terribly difficult
    not to commit the sin. Whenever I stop to think, I am appalled
    by the badness of my own life. Oh, Jim, Jim, how easily one forgets,
    how unthinkingly one allows oneself to be buried under a
    mountain of little earthy interests! The voices are muffled, the
    mind is blocked up, there’s no place for the spirit of God. When
    I’m working, I feel it’s all right; I’m living in the virtue of the
    Holy Ghost. For then I’m doing the best I can. But the rest
    of the time, that’s when I go wrong. One can’t be doing all the
    time, one can’t always give out. One must also be passive, must
    receive. That’s what I fail to do. I flutter about, I fill my mind
    with lumber, I make it impossible for myself to receive. One
    can’t go on like this; one can’t go on sinning against the Holy
    Ghost—not if one once realizes it.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>There was a line. The next note began: ‘To think steadily
    and intensely of one thing is a wonderful mental exercise; it serves
    to open up the mysteries that lie below the commonplace surface
    of existence; and perhaps, if one went on thinking long enough
    and hard enough, one might get through the mystery to its explanation.
    When I think, for example, of my hand .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.’ The note
    was a long one; it covered, in Miss Thriplow’s clear, cultured
    writing, more than two pages of the book.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Recently,’ she had written after that, ‘I have been saying my
    prayers again, as I used to when I was a child. Our Father which
    art in heaven—the words help to clear out one’s mind, to rid it of
    the lumber and leave it free for the coming of the spirit.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>The next three notes had got there by mistake. Their place was
    not in the secret, personal book, but in the other volume, wherein
    she recorded little snippets that might come in useful for her novels.
    Not, of course, that the entries in the secret book didn’t also come
    in useful for her fiction sometimes; but they were not recorded
    expressly for that purpose.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘A man in riding breeches,’ the first note ran: ‘he makes a
    little creaking noise as he walks along, whipcord rubbing against
    whipcord, that is like the creaking noise that swans make, flying,
    when they move their big white wings.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Then followed two lines of comic dialogue.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘<span class='it'>Me.</span> I find the <span class='it'>Fall of the House of Usher</span> a most blood-curdling
    story.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘<span class='it'>Frenchman.</span> Yes, yes, she bloods my curdle also.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>The third note recorded that ‘moss after a shower on a sultry
    day is like a sponge still damp from the hot bath.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>There followed a corollary to the note on prayer. ‘There is no
    doubt,’ she had written, ‘that the actual technique of prayer—the
    kneeling, the hiding the face in the hands, the uttering of words
    <span class='it'>in an audible voice</span>, the words being addressed into empty space—helps
    by its mere dissimilarity from the ordinary actions of everyday
    life to put one into a devout frame of mind.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>To-night she sat for some time in front of the open book, pen in
    hand, without writing anything. She frowned pensively and bit
    the end of her pen. In the end she put it on record that ‘St.
    Augustine, St. Francis and St. Ignatius Loyola lived dissolute
    lives before their conversions.’ Then, opening her other, her
    un-secret note-book, she wrote: ‘X and Y are old friends from childhood.
    X dashing, Y timid; Y admires X. Y marries, while X
    is at the war, a passionate creature who takes Y more out of pity
    (he is wounded) than from love. There is a child. X returns,
    falls in love with Y’s wife, A. Great passion amid growing anguish
    of mind—on her part because she is deceiving Y, whom she likes
    and respects, and daren’t undeceive him for fear of losing the child;
    on his part because he feels that he ought to give up all this sort of
    thing and devote himself to God, etc.; in fact, he feels the premonitions
    of conversion. One night they decide that the time has
    come to part; it can’t go on—she because of the deception, he
    because of mysticism, etc. It is a most touching scene, lasting all
    a last chaste night. Unfortunately Y finds out for some reason—baby
    ill, or something of the kind—that A is not staying at her
    mother’s as she said, but is elsewhere. Early in the morning
    Y comes to X’s flat to ask him to help in the search for A. Sees
    A’s coat and hat lying on the drawing-room sofa; understands all.
    In a fury flies at X, who, defending himself, kills him. The end.
    Question, however; doesn’t it end with too much of a click? too
    epigrammatically, so to speak? I wonder whether in this twentieth
    century one can permit oneself the luxury of such effective
    dramatic devices. Oughtn’t one to do it more <span class='it'>flatly</span>, somehow?
    More terre-à-terreishly, more real-lifeishly? I feel that a conclusion
    like that is almost an unfair advantage taken at the reader’s
    expense. One ought to arrange it differently. But the question
    is, how? Can one let them separate and show them living, she
    <span class='it'>en bonne mère de famille</span>, he as a coenobite? It would drag it
    out terribly, wouldn’t it? Must think of this carefully.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>She shut the book and put the cap on her fountain pen, feeling
    that she had done a good evening’s work. Calamy was now safely
    laid down in pickle, waiting to be consumed whenever she should
    be short of fictional provisions.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>After having undressed, washed, brushed her hair, polished her
    nails, greased her face and cleaned her teeth, Miss Thriplow turned
    out the light, and kneeling down by the side of her bed said several
    prayers, aloud. She then got into bed, and lying on her back, with
    all her muscles relaxed, she began to think about God.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>God is a spirit, she said to herself, a spirit, a spirit. She tried
    to picture something huge and empty, but alive. A huge flat
    expanse of sand, for example, and over it a huge blank dome of
    sky; and above the sand everything should be tremulous and
    shimmering with heat—an emptiness that was yet alive. A spirit,
    an all-pervading spirit. God is a spirit. Three camels appeared
    on the horizon of the sandy plain and went lolloping along in an
    absurd ungainly fashion from left to right. Miss Thriplow made
    an effort and dismissed them. God is a spirit, she said aloud.
    But of all animals camels are really almost the queerest; when one
    thinks of their frightfully supercilious faces, with their protruding
    under lips like the last Hapsburg kings of Spain .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. No, no;
    God is a spirit, all-pervading, everywhere. All the universes are
    made one in him. Layer upon layer .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. A Neapolitan ice
    floated up out of the darkness. She had never liked Neapolitan
    ices since that time, at the Franco-British exhibition, when she had
    eaten one and then taken a ride on Sir Hiram Maxim’s Captive
    Flying Machines. Round and round and round. Lord, how she
    had been sick, afterwards, in the Blue Grotto of Capri! ‘Sixpence
    each, ladies and gentlemen, only sixpence each for a trip to the
    celebrated Blue Grotto of Capri, the celebrated Blue Grotto, ladies
    and gentlemen.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.’ How sick! It must have been most
    awkward for the grown-ups.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. But God is a spirit. All the
    universes are one in the spirit. Mind and matter in all their
    manifestations—all one in the spirit. All one—she and the stars
    and the mountains and the trees and the animals and the blank
    spaces between the stars and .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. and the fish, the fish in the
    Aquarium at Monaco.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. And what fish! What extravagant
    fantasies! But no more extravagant or fantastic, really, than the
    painted and jewelled old women outside. It might make a very
    good episode in a book—a couple of those old women looking
    through the glass at the fishes. Very beautifully and discreetly
    described; and the fundamental similarity between the creatures
    on either side of the glass would just be delicately implied—not
    stated, oh, not stated; that would be too coarse, that would spoil
    everything, but just implied, by the description, so that the intelligent
    reader could take the hint. And then in the Casino .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
    Miss Thriplow brusquely interrupted herself. God is a spirit.
    Yes. Where was she? All things are one, ah yes, yes. All, all,
    all, she repeated. But to arrive at the realization of their oneness
    one must climb up into the spirit. The body separates, the spirit
    unites. One must give up the body, the self; one must lose one’s
    life to gain it. Lose one’s life, empty oneself of the separating
    Me. She clasped her hands tightly together, tighter, tighter, as
    though she were squeezing out her individual life between them.
    If she could squeeze it all out, make herself quite empty, then the
    other life would come rushing in to take its place.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Miss Thriplow lay quite still, hardly breathing. Empty, she
    said to herself every now and then, quite empty. She felt wonderfully
    tranquil. God was surely very near. The silence grew
    more profound, her spirit became calmer and emptier. Yes,
    God was very near.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Perhaps it was the distant roaring of a train in the valley far
    below that reminded her of the noise of the whirling drill; or
    perhaps the thin bright line of light that came in, through a chink
    in the top of the rickety old door, from the illuminated corridor,
    to reach half across the ceiling above her—perhaps it was this
    long sharp probe of brightness that reminded her of a surgical
    instrument. Whatever may have been the cause, Miss Thriplow
    suddenly found herself thinking of her dentist. Such a charming
    man; he had a china bull-dog on the mantel-piece of his consulting-room
    and a photograph of his wife and twins. His hair wouldn’t
    lie down. He had such kind grey eyes. And he was an enthusiast.
    ‘This is an instrument of which I’m particularly fond,
    Miss Thriplow,’ he used to say, picking out a little curved harpoon
    from his armoury. ‘A little wider, please, if you don’t mind.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.’
    What about a story of a dentist who falls in love with one of his
    patients? He shows her all the instruments, enthusiastically,
    wants her to like his favourites as much as he does. He pretends
    that there’s more wrong with her teeth than there really is, in
    order to see her more often.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>The dentist grew dim, he began the same gesture again and again,
    very slowly, but could never finish it, having forgotten, half-way
    through the act, what he meant to do. At last he disappeared
    altogether. Miss Thriplow had fallen into a profound and tranquil
    sleep.</p>

    <h2>CHAPTER IV</h2>

    <p class='pindent'>It had been raining, stormily; but now the wind had fallen
    and between the heavy clouds the sun was brightly shining. The
    yellowing chestnut trees stood motionless in the still bright air,
    glittering with moisture. A noise of rapidly running water filled
    the ear. The grass of the steep meadows shone in the sunlight.
    Calamy stepped out from the dark and frowsty living-room of the
    cottage and walked up the steep path on to the road. He halted
    here and looked about him. The road at this point was terraced
    out of one of the sides of a deep valley. The ground rose steeply,
    in places almost precipitously, above it. Below it the green mountain
    meadows, brilliant in the sunshine and dotted here and there
    with clumps of chestnut trees, fell away into the depths of the valley,
    which the afternoon sun had left already in a vaporous smoky
    shadow. Profoundly shadowed, too, were the hills on the further
    side of the narrow cleft. Huge black masses, smoky with the same
    vapour as that which floated at the bottom of the valley, they rose
    up almost in silhouette against the bright light beyond. The sun
    looked down, over their clouded summits, across the intervening
    gulf, touching the green hillside, on the slope of which Calamy
    was standing, with a radiance that, in contrast to the dark hills
    opposite, seemed almost unearthly. To the right, at the head
    of the valley, a great pinnacle of naked rock, pale brown and
    streaked here and there with snow-white veins of marble, reached
    up into the clouds and above them, so that the summit shone like a
    precious stone in the sunlight, against the blue of the sky. A band
    of white vapour hung round the shoulders of the mountain. Beneath
    it appeared the lower buttresses of rock and the long slopes of
    hanging wood and meadowland falling away into the valley, all
    shadowy under the clouds, shadowy and dead, save where, here and
    there, a great golden beam broke through, touching some chosen
    tract of grass or woodland or rock with an intense and precarious life.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Calamy stood for a long time looking out at the scene. How
    beautiful it was, how beautiful! Glittering in the light, the
    withering trees seemed to have prepared themselves as though for
    a feast. For a feast—and yet it was winter and death that awaited
    them. Beautiful the mountains were, but menacing and terrible;
    terrible the deep gulf below him with its smoky vaporous shadows,
    far down, below the shining green. And the shadows mounted
    second after second as the sun declined. Beautiful, terrible and
    mysterious, pregnant with what enormous secret, symbolic of what
    formidable reality?</p>

    <p class='pindent'>From the direction of the cottage below the road came a tinkle
    of bells and the shrill shouting of a child’s voice. Half a dozen
    tall black and white goats, with long black beards, long twisted
    horns and yellow eyes, slitted with narrow pupils, came trotting
    up the slope, shaking their flat bells. A little boy scrambled
    after them, brandishing a stick and shouting words of command.
    To Calamy he touched his cap; they exchanged a few words in
    Italian, about the rain, the goats, the best pasture; then, waving
    his stick and peremptorily shouting at his little flock, the child
    moved on up the road. The goats trotted on in front, their hoofs
    clicking on the stones; every now and then they paused to pull a
    mouthful of grass from the bank at the side of the road; but the
    little boy would not let them pause. ‘Via!’ he shouted, and
    banged them with his stick. They bounded forward. Soon
    herdsman and flock were out of sight.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>If he had been born that little boy, Calamy wondered, would he
    still be working, unquestioningly, among these hills: tending the
    beasts, cutting wood; every now and then carting his faggots and
    his cheeses down the long road to Vezza? Would he, still, unquestioningly?
    Would he see that the mountains were beautiful,
    beautiful and terrible? Or would he find them merely ungrateful
    land, demanding great labour, giving little in return? Would he
    believe in heaven and hell? And fitfully, when anything went
    wrong, would he still earnestly invoke the aid of the infant Jesus,
    of the Blessed Virgin and St. Joseph, that patriarchal family trinity—father,
    mother and baby—of the Italian peasant? Would he
    have married? By this time, very likely, his eldest children would
    be ten or twelve years old—driving the goats afield with shrill
    yellings and brandished sticks. Would he be living quietly and
    cheerfully the life of a young patriarch, happy in his children, his
    wife, his flocks and herds? Would he be happy to live thus, close
    to the earth, earthily, an ancient, instinctive, animally sagacious
    life? It seemed hardly imaginable. And yet, after all, it was
    likely enough. It needs a very strong, a passionately ardent spirit
    to disengage itself from childish tradition, from the life which
    circumstances impose upon it. Was his such a spirit?</p>

    <p class='pindent'>He was startled out of his speculations by the sound of his own
    name, loudly called from a little distance. He turned round and
    saw Mr. Cardan and Chelifer striding up the road towards him.
    Calamy waved his hand and went to meet them. Was he pleased
    to see them or not? He hardly knew.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Well,’ said Mr. Cardan, twinkling jovially, as he approached,
    ‘how goes life in the Thebaïd? Do you object to receiving a
    couple of impious visitors from Alexandria?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Calamy laughed and shook their hands without answering.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Did you get wet?’ he asked, to change the conversation.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘We hid in a cave,’ said Mr. Cardan. He looked round at the
    view. ‘Pretty good,’ he said encouragingly, as though it were
    Calamy who had made the landscape, ‘pretty good, I must say.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Agreeably Wordsworthian,’ said Chelifer in his precise voice.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘And where do you live?’ asked Mr. Cardan.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Calamy pointed to the cottage. Mr. Cardan nodded comprehendingly.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Hearts of gold, but a little niffy, eh?’ he asked, lifting his
    raised white eyebrow still higher.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Not to speak of,’ said Calamy.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Charming girls?’ Mr. Cardan went on. ‘Or goitres?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Neither,’ said Calamy.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘And how long do you propose to stay?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I haven’t the faintest idea.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Till you’ve got to the bottom of the cosmos, eh?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Calamy smiled. ‘That’s about it.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Splendid,’ said Mr. Cardan, patting him on the arm, ‘splendid.
    I envy you. God, what wouldn’t I give to be your age? What
    wouldn’t I give?’ He shook his head sadly. ‘And, alas,’ he
    added, ‘what could I give, in point of actual fact? I put it at about
    twelve hundred quid at the present time. My total fortune.
    Shouldn’t we sit down?’ he added on another note.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Calamy led the way down the little path. Along the front of
    the cottage, under the windows, ran a long bench. The three
    men sat down. The sun shone full upon them; it was pleasantly
    warm. Beneath them was the narrow valley with its smoky
    shadows; opposite, the black hills, cloud-capped and silhouetted
    against the brightness of the sky about the sun.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘And the trip to Rome,’ Calamy inquired, ‘was that agreeable?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Tolerably,’ said Chelifer, with precision.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘And Miss Elver?’ he addressed himself politely to Mr. Cardan.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Mr. Cardan looked up at him. ‘Hadn’t you heard?’ he
    asked.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Heard what?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘She’s dead.’ Mr. Cardan’s face became all at once very hard
    and still.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I’m sorry,’ said Calamy. ‘I didn’t know.’ He thought it
    more tactful to proffer no further condolences. There was a
    silence.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘That’s something,’ said Mr. Cardan at last, ‘that you’ll find
    it rather difficult to contemplate away, however long and mystically
    you stare at your navel.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘What?’ asked Calamy.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Death,’ Mr. Cardan answered. ‘You can’t get over the fact
    that, at the end of everything, the flesh gets hold of the spirit,
    and squeezes the life out of it, so that a man turns into something
    that’s no better than a whining sick animal. And as the flesh
    sickens the spirit sickens, manifestly. Finally the flesh dies and
    putrefies; and the spirit presumably putrefies too. And there’s
    an end of your omphaloskepsis, with all its by-products, God and
    justice and salvation and all the rest of them.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Perhaps it is,’ said Calamy. ‘Let’s admit it as certain, even.
    I don’t see that it makes the slightest difference.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘No difference?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Calamy shook his head. ‘Salvation’s not in the next world;
    it’s in this. One doesn’t behave well here for the sake of a harp
    and wings after one is dead—or even for the sake of contemplating
    throughout eternity the good, the true and the beautiful. If one
    desires salvation, it’s salvation here and now. The kingdom of
    God is within you—if you’ll excuse the quotation,’ he added,
    turning with a smile to Mr. Cardan. ‘The conquest of that
    kingdom, now, in this life—that’s your salvationist’s ambition.
    There may be a life to come, or there may not; it’s really quite
    irrelevant to the main issue. To be upset because the soul may
    decay with the body is really mediaeval. Your mediaeval theologian
    made up for his really frightful cynicism about this world
    by a childish optimism about the next. Future justice was to
    compensate for the disgusting horrors of the present. Take
    away the life to come and the horrors remain, untempered and
    unpalliated.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Quite so,’ said Chelifer.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Seen from the mediaeval point of view,’ Calamy went on, ‘the
    prospect is most disquieting. The Indians—and for that matter
    the founder of Christianity—supply the corrective with the doctrine
    of salvation in this life, irrespective of the life to come. Each
    man can achieve salvation in his own way.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I’m glad you admit that,’ said Mr. Cardan. ‘I was afraid
    you’d begin telling us that we all had to live on lettuces and look
    at our navels.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I have it from no less an authority than yourself,’ Calamy
    answered, laughing, ‘that there are—how many?—eighty-four
    thousand—isn’t it?—different ways of achieving salvation.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Fully,’ said Mr. Cardan, ‘and a great many more for going to
    the devil. But all this, my young friend,’ he pursued, shaking his
    head, ‘doesn’t in any way mitigate the disagreeableness of slowly
    becoming <span class='it'>gaga</span>, dying and being eaten by worms. One may have
    achieved salvation in this life, certainly; but that makes it none
    the less insufferable that, at the end of the account, one’s soul should
    inevitably succumb to one’s body. I, for example, am saved—I
    put the case quite hypothetically, mind you—I have been living
    in a state of moral integrity and this-worldly salvation for the last
    half-century, ever since I reached the age of puberty. Let this be
    granted. Have I, for this reason, any the less cause to be distressed
    by the prospect, in a few years’ time, of becoming a senile imbecile,
    blind, deaf, toothless, witless, without interest in anything, partially
    paralysed, revolting to my fellows—and all the rest of the Burtonian
    catalogue? When my soul is at the mercy of my slowly rotting
    body, what will be the use of salvation then?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘It will have profited during the fifty years of healthy life,’
    said Calamy.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘But I’m talking about the unhealthy years,’ Mr. Cardan
    insisted, ‘when the soul’s at the mercy of the body.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Calamy was silent for a moment. ‘It’s difficult,’ he said
    pensively, ‘it’s horribly difficult. The fundamental question is
    this: Can you talk of the soul being at the mercy of the body, can
    you give any kind of an explanation of mind in terms of matter?
    When you reflect that it’s the human mind that has invented
    space, time and matter, picking them out of reality in a quite
    arbitrary fashion—can you attempt to explain a thing in terms
    of something it has invented itself? That’s the fundamental
    question.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘It’s like the question of the authorship of the <span class='it'>Iliad</span>,’ said
    Mr. Cardan. ‘The author of that poem is either Homer or, if
    not Homer, somebody else of the same name. Similarly, philosophically
    and even, according to the new physics, scientifically
    speaking, matter may not be matter, <span class='it'>really</span>. But the fact remains
    that something having all the properties we have always attributed
    to matter is perpetually getting in our way, and that our minds do,
    in point of fact, fall under the dominion of certain bits of this matter,
    known as our bodies, changing as they change and keeping pace
    with their decay.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Calamy ran his fingers perplexedly through his hair. ‘Yes, of
    course, it’s devilishly difficult,’ he said. ‘You can’t help behaving
    <span class='it'>as if</span> things really were as they seem to be. At the same time, there
    <span class='it'>is</span> a reality which is totally different and which a change in our
    physical environment, a removal of our bodily limitations, would
    enable us to get nearer to. Perhaps by thinking hard enough .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.’
    He paused, shaking his head. ‘How many days did Gotama spend
    under the bo-tree? Perhaps if you spend long enough and your
    mind is the right sort of mind, perhaps you really do get, in some
    queer sort of way, beyond the limitations of ordinary existence.
    And you see that everything that seems real is in fact entirely
    illusory—<span class='it'>maya</span>, in fact, the cosmic illusion. Behind it you catch
    a glimpse of reality.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘But what bosh your mystics talk about it,’ said Mr. Cardan.
    ‘Have you ever read Boehme, for example? Lights and darknesses,
    wheels and compunctions, sweets and bitters, mercury, salt
    and sulphur—it’s a rigmarole.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘It’s only to be expected,’ said Calamy. ‘How is a man to give
    an account of something entirely unlike the phenomena of known
    existence in a language invented to describe these phenomena?
    You might give a deaf man a most detailed verbal description of
    the Fifth Symphony; but he wouldn’t be much the wiser for it,
    and he’d think you were talking pure balderdash—which from his
    point of view you would be.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘True,’ said Mr. Cardan; ‘but I have my doubts whether any
    amount of sitting under bo-trees really makes it possible for any one
    to wriggle out of human limitations and get behind phenomena.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Well, I’m inclined to think that it does make it possible,’ said
    Calamy. ‘There we must agree to differ. But even if it is impossible
    to get at reality, the fact that reality exists and is manifestly
    very different from what we ordinarily suppose it to be, surely
    throws some light on this horrible death business. Certainly, as
    things seem to happen, it’s as if the body did get hold of the soul
    and kill it. But the real facts of the case may be entirely different.
    The body as we know it is an invention of the mind. What is the
    reality on which the abstracting, symbolizing mind does its work
    of abstraction and symbolism? It is possible that, at death, we
    may find out. And in any case, what is death, <span class='it'>really</span>?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘It’s a pity,’ put in Chelifer, in his dry, clear, accurate voice,
    ‘it’s a pity that the human mind didn’t do its job of invention a
    little better while it was about it. We might, for example, have
    made our symbolic abstraction of reality in such a way that it
    would be unnecessary for a creative and possibly immortal soul
    to be troubled with the haemorrhoids.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Calamy laughed. ‘Incorrigible sentimentalist!’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Sentimentalist?’ echoed Chelifer, on a note of surprise.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘A sentimentalist inside out,’ said Calamy, nodding affirmatively.
    ‘Such wild romanticism as yours—I imagined it had been extinct
    since the deposition of Louis-Philippe.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Chelifer laughed good-humouredly. ‘Perhaps you’re right,’
    he said. ‘Though I must say I myself should have handed out
    the prize for sentimentality to those who regard what is commonly
    known as reality—the Harrow Road, for example, or the Café de
    la Rotonde in Paris—as a mere illusion, who run away from it and
    devote their time and energy to occupations which Mr. Cardan
    sums up and symbolizes in the word omphaloskepsis. Aren’t they
    the soft-heads, the all-too-susceptible and sentimental imbeciles?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘On the contrary,’ Calamy replied, ‘in point of historical fact
    they’ve generally been men of the highest intelligence. Buddha,
    Jesus, Lao-tsze, Boehme, in spite of his wheels and compunctions,
    his salt and sulphur, Swedenborg. And what about Sir Isaac
    Newton, who practically abandoned mathematics for mysticism
    after he was thirty? Not that he was a particularly good mystic;
    he wasn’t. But he tried to be; and it can’t be said that he was
    remarkable for the softness of his head. No, it’s not fools who
    turn mystics. It takes a certain amount of intelligence and imagination
    to realize the extraordinary queerness and mysteriousness of
    the world in which we live. The fools, the innumerable fools,
    take it all for granted, skate about cheerfully on the surface and
    never think of inquiring what’s underneath. They’re content
    with appearances, such as your Harrow Road or Café de la Rotonde,
    call them realities and proceed to abuse any one who takes an interest
    in what lies underneath these superficial symbols, as a romantic
    imbecile.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘But it’s cowardice to run away,’ Chelifer insisted. ‘One
    has no right to ignore what for ninety-nine out of every hundred
    human beings is reality—even though it mayn’t actually be the
    real thing. One has no right.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Why not?’ asked Calamy. ‘One has a right to be six foot
    nine inches high and to take sixteens in boots. One has a right,
    even though there are not more than three or four in every million
    like one. Why hasn’t one the right to be born with an unusual
    sort of mind, a mind that can’t be content with the surface-life
    of appearances?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘But such a mind is irrelevant, a freak,’ said Chelifer. ‘In
    real life—or if you prefer it, in the life that we treat as if it were
    real—it’s the other minds that preponderate, that are the rule.
    The brutish minds. I repeat, you haven’t the right to run away
    from that. If you want to know what human life is, you must be
    courageous and live as the majority of human beings actually do
    live. It’s singularly revolting, I assure you.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘There you are again with your sentimentality,’ complained
    Calamy. ‘You’re just the common variety of sentimentalist
    reversed. The ordinary kind pretends that so-called real life is
    more rosy than it actually is. The reversed sentimentalist gloats
    over its horrors. The bad principle is the same in both cases—an
    excessive preoccupation with what is illusory. The man of
    sense sees the world of appearances neither too rosily nor too
    biliously and passes on. There is the ulterior reality to be looked
    for; it is more interesting.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Then you’d condemn out of hand all the countless human
    beings whose life is passed on the surface?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Of course not,’ Calamy replied. ‘Who would be such a fool
    as to condemn a fact? These people exist; it’s obvious. They
    have their choice of Mr. Cardan’s eighty-four thousand paths to
    salvation. The path I choose will probably be different from others.
    That’s all.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Very likely,’ said Mr. Cardan, who had been engaged in lighting
    a cigar, ‘very likely they’ll find the road to their salvation more
    easily than you will find the road to yours. Being simpler, they’ll
    have within them fewer causes for disharmony. Many of them
    are still practically in the tribal state, blindly obeying the social
    code that has been suggested into them from childhood. That’s
    the pre-lapsarian state; they’ve not yet eaten of the tree of the
    knowledge of good and evil—or rather it’s the whole tribe, not the
    individual, that has eaten. And the individual is so much a part of
    the tribe that it doesn’t occur to him to act against its ordinances,
    any more than it occurs to my teeth to begin violently biting my
    tongue of their own accord. Those simple souls—and there are
    still a lot of them left, even among the motor buses—will find their
    way to salvation very easily. The difficulty begins when the
    individuals begin to get thoroughly conscious of themselves apart
    from the tribe. There’s an immense number of people who
    ought to be tribal savages, but who have been made conscious of
    their individuality. They can’t obey tribal morality blindly and
    they’re too feeble to think for themselves. I should say that the
    majority of people in a modern educated democratic state are at
    that stage—too conscious of themselves to obey blindly, too inept
    to be able to behave in a reasonable manner on their own account.
    Hence that delightful contemporary state of affairs which so rejoices
    the heart of our friend Chelifer. We fall most horribly
    between two stools—the tribe and the society of conscious intelligent
    beings.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘It’s comforting to think,’ said Chelifer, ‘that modern civilization
    is doing its best to re-establish the tribal régime, but on an
    enormous, national and even international scale. Cheap printing,
    wireless telephones, trains, motor cars, gramophones and all the
    rest are making it possible to consolidate tribes, not of a few
    thousands, but of millions. To judge from the Middle Western
    novelists, the process seems already to have gone a long way in
    America. In a few generations it may be that the whole planet
    will be covered by one vast American-speaking tribe, composed of
    innumerable individuals, all thinking and acting in exactly the
    same way, like the characters in a novel by Sinclair Lewis. It’s
    a most pleasing speculation—though, of course,’ Chelifer added
    guardedly, ‘the future is no concern of ours.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Mr. Cardan nodded and puffed at his cigar. ‘That’s certainly
    a possibility,’ he said. ‘A probability almost; for I don’t see
    that it’s in the least likely that we shall be able to breed a race of
    beings, at any rate within the next few thousand years, sufficiently
    intelligent to be able to form a stable non-tribal society. Education
    has made the old tribalism impossible and has done nothing—nor
    ever will do anything—to make the non-tribal society possible.
    It will be necessary, therefore, if we require social stability, to create
    a new kind of tribalism, on the basis of universal education for
    the stupid, using the press, wireless and all the rest as the instruments
    by which the new order is to be established. In a generation
    or two of steady conscious work it ought to be possible, as
    Chelifer says, to turn all but two or three hundred in every million
    of the inhabitants of the planet into Babbitts.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Perhaps a slightly lower standard would be necessary,’ suggested
    Chelifer.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘It’s a remarkable thing,’ pursued Mr. Cardan meditatively,
    ‘that the greatest and most influential reformer of modern times,
    Tolstoy, should also have proposed a reversion to tribalism as the
    sole remedy to civilized restlessness and uncertainty of purpose.
    But while we propose a tribalism based on the facts—or should I
    say the appearances?’—Mr. Cardan twinkled amicably at Calamy—‘of
    modern life, Tolstoy proposed a return to the genuine,
    primordial, uneducated, dirty tribalism of the savage. That won’t
    do, of course; because it’s hardly probable, once they have tasted
    it, that men will allow <span class='it'>le confort moderne</span>, as they call it in hotels,
    to be taken from them. Our suggestion is the more practicable—the
    creation of a planet-wide tribe of Babbitts. They’d be much
    easier to propagate, now, than moujiks. But still the principle
    remains the same in both projects—a return to the tribal state.
    And when Tolstoy and Chelifer and myself agree about anything,
    believe me,’ said Mr. Cardan, ‘there’s something in it. By the
    way,’ he added, ‘I hope we haven’t been hurting your susceptibilities,
    Calamy. You’re not moujiking up here, are you?
    Digging and killing pigs and so on. Are you? I trust not.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Calamy shook his head, laughing. ‘I cut wood in the mornings,
    for exercise,’ he said. ‘But not on principle, I assure you, not
    on principle.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Ah, that’s all right,’ said Mr. Cardan. ‘I was afraid you
    might be doing it on principle.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘It would be a stupidity,’ said Calamy. ‘What would be the
    point of doing badly something for which I have no aptitude;
    something, moreover, which would prevent me from doing the
    thing for which it seems to me just possible I may have some
    native capacity.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘And what, might I ask,’ said Mr. Cardan with an assumed
    diffidence and tactful courtesy, ‘what may that thing be?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘That’s rather biting,’ said Calamy, smiling. ‘But you may
    well ask. For it has certainly been hard to see, until now, what
    my peculiar talent was. I’ve not even known myself. Was it
    making love? or riding? or shooting antelopes in Africa? or
    commanding a company of infantry? or desultory reading at
    lightning speeds? or drinking champagne? or a good memory?
    or my bass voice? Or what? I’m inclined to think it was the
    first: making love.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Not at all a bad talent,’ said Mr. Cardan judicially.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘But not, I find, one that one can go on cultivating indefinitely,’
    said Calamy. ‘And the same is true of the others—true at any
    rate for me.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. No, if I had no aptitudes but those, I might
    certainly as well devote myself exclusively to digging the ground.
    But I begin to find in myself a certain aptitude for meditation
    which seems to me worth cultivating. And I doubt if one can
    cultivate meditation at the same time as the land. So I only cut
    wood for exercise.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘That’s good,’ said Mr. Cardan. ‘I should be sorry to think
    you were doing anything actively useful. You retain the instincts
    of a gentleman; that’s excellent.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Satan!’ said Calamy, laughing. ‘But do you suppose I don’t
    know very well that you can make out the most damning case
    against the idle anchorite who sits looking at his navel while
    other people work? Do you suppose I haven’t thought of
    that?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I’m sure you have,’ Mr. Cardan answered, genially twinkling.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘The case looks damning enough, no doubt. But it’s only
    really cogent when the anchorite doesn’t do his job properly,
    when he’s born to be active and not contemplative. The imbeciles
    who rush about bawling that action is the end of life, and that
    thought has no value except in so far as it leads to action, are speaking
    only for themselves. There are eighty-four thousand paths.
    The pure contemplative has a right to one of them.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I should be the last to deny it,’ said Mr. Cardan.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘And if I find that it’s not my path,’ pursued Calamy, ‘I shall
    turn back and try what can be done in the way of practical life.
    Up till now, I must say I’ve not seen much hope for myself that
    way. But then, it must be admitted, I didn’t look for the road
    in places where I was very likely to find it.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘What has always seemed to me to be the chief objection to
    protracted omphaloskepsis,’ said Mr. Cardan, after a little silence,
    ‘is the fact that you’re left too much to your personal resources;
    you have to live on your own mental fat, so to speak, instead of
    being able to nourish yourself from outside. And to know yourself
    becomes impossible; because you can’t know yourself except
    in relation to other people.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘That’s true,’ said Calamy. ‘Part of yourself you can certainly
    get to know only in relation to what is outside. In the course of
    twelve or fifteen years of adult life I think I’ve got to know that
    part of me very thoroughly. I’ve met a lot of people, been in a
    great many curious situations, so that almost every potentiality
    latent in that part of my being has had a chance to unfold itself
    into actuality. Why should I go on? There’s nothing more I
    really want to know about that part of myself; nothing more, of
    any significance, I imagine, that I could get to know by contact
    with what is external. On the other hand, there is a whole universe
    within me, unknown and waiting to be explored; a whole universe
    that can only be approached by way of introspection and patient
    uninterrupted thought. Merely to satisfy curiosity it would
    surely be worth exploring. But there are motives more impelling
    than curiosity to persuade me. What one may find there is so
    important that it’s almost a matter of life and death to undertake
    the search.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Hm,’ said Mr. Cardan. ‘And what will happen at the end
    of three months’ chaste meditation when some lovely young
    temptation comes toddling down this road, “balancing her
    haunches,” as Zola would say, and rolling the large black eye?
    What will happen to your explorations of the inward universe
    then, may I ask?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Well,’ said Calamy, ‘I hope they’ll proceed uninterrupted.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘You hope? Piously?’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘And I shall certainly do my best to see that they do,’ Calamy
    added.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘It won’t be easy,’ Mr. Cardan assured him.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I know.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Perhaps you’ll find that you can explore simultaneously both
    the temptation and the interior universe.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Calamy shook his head. ‘Alas, I’m afraid that’s not practicable.
    It would be delightful if it were. But for some reason it
    isn’t. Even in moderation it won’t do. I know that, more
    or less, by experience. And the authorities are all agreed
    about it.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘But after all,’ said Chelifer, ‘there have been religions that
    prescribed indulgence in these particular temptations as a discipline
    and ceremony at certain seasons and to celebrate certain
    feasts.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘But they didn’t pretend,’ Calamy answered, ‘that it was a
    discipline that made it easy for those who underwent it to explore
    the inward universe of mind.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Perhaps they did,’ objected Chelifer. ‘After all, there’s no
    golden rule. At one time and in one place you honour your father
    and your mother when they grow old; elsewhere and at other
    periods you knock them on the head and put them into the <span class='it'>pot-au-feu</span>.
    Everything has been right at one time or another and
    everything has been wrong.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘That’s only true with reservations,’ said Calamy, ‘and the
    reservations are the most important part. There’s a parallel, it
    seems to me, between the moral and the physical world. In the
    physical world you call the unknowable reality the Four-Dimensional
    Continuum. The Continuum is the same for all observers;
    but when they want to draw a picture of it for themselves, they
    select different axes for their graphs, according to their different
    motions—and according to their different minds and physical
    limitations. Human beings have selected three-dimensional space
    and time as their axes. Their minds, their bodies and the earth on
    which they live being what they are, human beings could not have
    done otherwise. Space and time are necessary and inevitable ideas
    for us. And when we want to draw a picture of that other reality
    in which we live—is it different, or is it somehow, incomprehensibly,
    the same?—we choose, unescapably—we cannot fail to choose,
    those axes of reference which we call good and evil; the laws of
    our being make it necessary for us to see things under the aspects
    of good and evil. The reality remains the same; but the axes
    vary with the mental position, so to speak, and the varying capacities
    of different observers. Some observers are clearer-sighted
    and in some way more advantageously placed than others.
    The incessantly changing social conventions and moral codes of
    history represent the shifting axes of reference chosen by the least
    curious, most myopic and worst-placed observers. But the axes
    chosen by the best observers have always been startlingly like one
    another. Gotama, Jesus and Lao-tsze, for example; they lived
    sufficiently far from one another in space, time and social position.
    But their pictures of reality resemble one another very closely.
    The nearer a man approaches these in penetration, the more nearly
    will his axes of moral reference correspond with theirs. And when
    all the most acute observers agree in saying that indulgence in these
    particular amusements interferes with the exploration of the spiritual
    world, then one can be pretty sure it’s true. In itself, no doubt,
    the natural and moderate satisfaction of the sexual instincts is a
    matter quite indifferent to morality. It is only in relation to something
    else that the satisfaction of a natural instinct can be said to
    be good or bad. It might be bad, for example, if it involved deceit
    or cruelty. It is certainly bad when it enslaves a mind that feels,
    within itself, that it ought to be free—free to contemplate and
    recollect itself.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘No doubt,’ said Mr. Cardan. ‘But as a practical man, I can
    only say that it’s going to be most horribly difficult to preserve
    that freedom. That balancing of haunches .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.’ He waved
    his cigar from side to side. ‘I shall call again in six months and
    see how you feel about it all then. It’s extraordinary what an
    effect the natural appetites do have on good resolutions. Satiated,
    one thinks regeneration will be so easy; but when one’s hungry
    again, how hard it seems.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>They were silent. From the depths of the valley the smoky
    shadows had climbed higher and higher up the slope. The
    opposite hills were now profoundly black and the clouds in which
    their peaks were involved had become dark and menacing save
    where, on their upper surfaces, the sun touched them with, as it
    declined, an ever richer light. The shadow had climbed up to
    within a hundred feet of where they were sitting, soon it would
    envelop them. With a great jangling of bells and a clicking of
    small hard hoofs the six tall piebald goats came trotting down the
    steep path from the road. The little boy ran behind them, waving
    his stick. ‘Eia-oo!’ he shouted with a kind of Homeric fury;
    but at the sight of the three men sitting on the bench outside the
    house he suddenly became silent, blushed and slunk unheroically
    away, hardly daring to whisper to the goats while he drove them
    into their stable for the night.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Dear me,’ said Chelifer, who had followed the movements of
    the animals with a certain curiosity, ‘I believe those are the first
    goats I have seen, or smelt, in the flesh since I took to writing
    about them in my paper. Most interesting. One tends to forget
    that the creatures really exist.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘One tends to forget that anything or any one really exists,
    outside oneself,’ said Mr. Cardan. ‘It’s always a bit of a shock
    to find that they do.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Three days hence,’ said Chelifer meditatively, ‘I shall be at
    my office again. Rabbits, goats, mice; Fetter Lane; the family
    <span class='it'>pension</span>. All the familiar horrors of reality.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Sentimentalist!’ mocked Calamy.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Meanwhile,’ said Mr. Cardan, ‘Lilian has suddenly decided to
    move on to Monte Carlo. I go with her, of course; one can’t
    reject free meals when they’re offered.’ He threw away his
    cigar, got up and stretched himself. ‘Well, we must be getting
    down before it gets dark.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I shan’t see you again for some time, then?’ said Calamy.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘I shall be here again at the end of six months, never fear,’
    said Mr. Cardan. ‘Even if I have to come at my own
    expense.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>They climbed up the steep little path on to the road.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Good-bye.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>‘Good-bye.’</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Calamy watched them go, watched them till they were out of
    sight round a bend in the road. A profound melancholy settled
    down upon him. With them, he felt, had gone all his old, familiar
    life. He was left quite alone with something new and strange.
    What was to come of this parting?</p>

    <p class='pindent'>Or perhaps, he reflected, nothing would come of it. Perhaps
    he had been a fool.</p>

    <p class='pindent'>The cottage was in the shadow now. Looking up the slope he
    could see a clump of trees still glittering as though prepared for a
    festival above the rising flood of darkness. And at the head of the
    valley, like an immense precious stone, glowing with its own
    inward fire, the limestone crags reached up through the clouds
    into the pale sky. Perhaps he had been a fool, thought Calamy.
    But looking at that shining peak, he was somehow reassured.</p>
