<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>X</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-3" id="chapter-3-10" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">X</h3>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan returned to the palace of the Cybo Malaspina to find that the number of guests had been increased during his absence by the arrival of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Chelifer. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Aldwinkle had not been particularly anxious to have Chelifer’s mother in the house, but finding that Chelifer was preparing to leave as soon as his mother should arrive, she peremptorily insisted on giving the lady hospitality.</p>
			<p>“It’s absurd,” she argued, “to go down again to that horrible hotel at Marina di Vezza, stay there uncomfortably for a few days and then go to Rome by train. You must bring your mother here, and then, when it’s time for <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Falx to go to his conference, we’ll all go to Rome in the car. It’ll be far pleasanter.”</p>
			<p>Chelifer tried to object; but <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Aldwinkle would not hear of objections. When <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Chelifer arrived at the station of Vezza she found Francis waiting for her on the platform with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Aldwinkle, in yellow tussore and a floating white veil, at his side. The welcome she got from <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Aldwinkle was far more effusively affectionate than that which she got from her son. A little bewildered, but preserving all her calm and gentle dignity, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Chelifer suffered herself to be led towards the Rolls-Royce.</p>
			<p>“We all admire your son so enormously,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Aldwinkle. “He’s so⁠—how shall I say?⁠—so <i xml:lang="la">post bellum</i>, so essentially one of <em>us</em>.” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Aldwinkle made haste to establish her position among the youngest of the younger generation. “All that one only dimly feels he expresses. Can you be surprised at our admiration?”</p>
			<p>So far <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Chelifer was rather surprised by everything. It took her some time to get used to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Aldwinkle. Nor was the aspect of the palace calculated to allay her astonishment.</p>
			<p>“A superb specimen of early baroque,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Aldwinkle assured her, pointing with her parasol. But even after she knew the dates, it all seemed to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Chelifer rather queer.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Aldwinkle remained extremely cordial to her new guest; but in secret she disliked <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Chelifer extremely. There would have been small reason, in any circumstances, for <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Aldwinkle to have liked her. The two women had nothing in common; their views of life were different and irreconcilable, they had lived in separate worlds. At the best of times <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Aldwinkle would have found her guest bourgeoise and <i xml:lang="fr">bornée</i>. As things actually were she loathed her. And no wonder; for in his mother Chelifer had a permanent and unexceptionable excuse for getting away from <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Aldwinkle. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Aldwinkle naturally resented the presence in her house of this cause and living justification of infidelity. At the same time it was necessary for her to keep on good terms with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Chelifer; for if she quarrelled with the mother, it was obvious that the son would take himself off. Inwardly chafing, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Aldwinkle continued to treat her with the same gushing affection as at first.</p>
			<p>To <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Aldwinkle’s guests the arrival of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Chelifer was more welcome than to herself. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Falx found in her a more sympathetic and comprehensible soul than he could discover in his hostess. To Lord Hovenden and Irene her arrival meant the complete cessation of Irene’s duties as a spy; they liked her well enough, moreover, for her own sake.</p>
			<p>“A nice old fing,” was how Lord Hovenden summed her up.</p>
			<p>Miss Thriplow affected almost to worship her.</p>
			<p>“She’s so wonderfully good and simple and <em>integral</em>, if you understand what I mean,” Miss Thriplow explained to Calamy. “To be able to be so undividedly enthusiastic about folk-songs and animals’ rights and all that sort of thing⁠—it’s really wonderful. She’s a lesson to us,” Miss Thriplow concluded, “a lesson.” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Chelifer became endowed, for her, with all the qualities that the village grocer had unfortunately not possessed. The symbol of his virtues⁠—if only he had possessed them⁠—had been the white apron; <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Chelifer’s integrity was figured forth by her dateless grey dresses.</p>
			<p>“She’s one of Nature’s Quakeresses,” Miss Thriplow declared. “If only one could be born like that!” There had been a time, not so long ago, when she had aspired to be one of Nature’s Guardswomen. “I never knew that anything so good and dove-coloured existed outside of Academy subject-pictures of 1880. You know: ‘A Pilgrim Mother on Board the Mayflower,’ or something of that sort. It’s absurd in the Academy. But it’s lovely in real life.”</p>
			<p>Calamy agreed.</p>
			<p>But the person who most genuinely liked <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Chelifer was Grace Elver. From the moment she set eyes on <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Chelifer, Grace was her doglike attendant. And <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Chelifer responded by practically adopting her for the time being. When he learned the nature of her tastes and occupations, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan explained her kindness to himself by the hypothesis that poor Grace was the nearest thing to a stray dog or cat that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Chelifer could find. Conversely, Grace’s love at first sight must be due to the realization by that catlike mind that here was a born protector and friend. In any case, he was exceedingly grateful to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Chelifer for having made her appearance when she did. Her presence in the house made easy what would otherwise have been a difficult situation.</p>
			<p>That <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Aldwinkle would be impressed by the romantic story of Grace’s abduction <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan had always been certain. And when he told the story, she <em>was</em> impressed, though less profoundly than <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan had hoped; she was too much preoccupied with her own affairs to be able to respond with her customary enthusiasm to what, at other times, would have been an irresistible appeal. About her reception of the story, then, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan had never entertained a doubt; he knew that she would find it romantic. But that was no guarantee that she would like the heroine of the story. From what he knew of her, which was a great deal, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan felt sure that she would very quickly find poor Grace exceedingly tiresome. He knew her lack of patience and her intolerance. Grace would get on her nerves; Lilian would be unkind, and goodness only knew what scenes might follow. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan had brought her to the palace meaning to stay only a day or two and then take his leave, before <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Aldwinkle had had time to get poor Grace on her nerves. But the presence of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Chelifer made him change his mind. Her affectionate protection was a guarantee against <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Aldwinkle’s impatience; more important still, it had the best possible effect on Grace herself. In <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Chelifer’s presence she behaved quietly and sensibly, like a child doing its best to make a good impression. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Chelifer, moreover, kept a tenderly watchful eye on her appearance and her manners; kept her up to the mark about washing her hands and brushing her hair, dropped a gentle hint when she was not behaving as well as she ought to at table, and checked her propensity to eat too much of the things she liked and not enough of those she didn’t like. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Chelifer, it was obvious, had the best possible influence over her. When they were married, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan decided, he would frequently invite <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Chelifer to stay⁠—preferably, though she was a very nice old thing, while he was away from home. Meanwhile, secure that his residence at the palace of the Cybo Malaspina would be marred by no disagreeable incidents, he wrote to his lawyer to make the necessary arrangements about his marriage.</p>
			<p>For her part, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Chelifer was delighted to have found Grace. As <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan had divined, she missed her cats and dogs, her poor children and traditional games. It was very reluctantly that she had at last given up the old Oxford house; very reluctantly, though the arguments that Francis had used to persuade her were unanswerable. It was too large for her, it was full of those medieval labour-creating devices of which <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Ruskin and his architectural followers were so fond, it cost more to keep up than she could afford; moreover, it was unhealthy, she was regularly ill there every winter; the doctors had been urging her for years past to get out of the Thames valley. Yes, the arguments were quite unanswerable; but it had been a long time before she had finally made up her mind to leave the place. Forty years of her life had been passed there; she was loth to part with all those memories. And then there were the dogs and the poor children, all her old friends and her charities. In the end, however, she had allowed herself to be persuaded. The house was sold; it was arranged that she should spend the winter in Rome.</p>
			<p>“Now you’re free,” her son had said.</p>
			<p>But <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Chelifer rather mournfully shook her head. “I don’t know that I very much like being free,” she answered. “I shall be without occupation in Rome. I look forward to it almost with dread.”</p>
			<p>Francis reassured her. “You’ll soon find something,” he said. “Don’t be afraid of that.”</p>
			<p>“Shall I?” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Chelifer questioned doubtfully. They were walking together in the little garden at the back of the house; looking round her at the familiar grass plot and flower beds, she sighed.</p>
			<p>But Francis was right; dogs, poor children or their equivalents are fortunately not rare. At the end of the first stage of her journey <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Chelifer had found, in Grace Elver, a compensation for what she had abandoned at Oxford. Attending to poor Grace she was happy.</p>
			<p>For the rest of the party Miss Elver’s arrival had no special or personal significance. For them she was just <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan’s half-wit; that was all. Even Mary Thriplow, who might have been expected to take an interest in so genuine a specimen of the simple soul, paid little attention to her. The fact was that Grace was really too simple to be interesting. Simplicity is no virtue unless you are potentially complicated. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Chelifer, being with all her simplicity a woman of intelligence, threw light, Miss Thriplow felt, on her own case. Grace was simple only as a child or an imbecile is simple; her didactic value was therefore nil. Miss Thriplow remained faithful to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Chelifer.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
