<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>IV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-5" id="chapter-5-4" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</h3>
			<p>It had been raining, stormily; but now the wind had fallen and between the heavy clouds the sun was brightly shining. The yellowing chestnut trees stood motionless in the still bright air, glittering with moisture. A noise of rapidly running water filled the ear. The grass of the steep meadows shone in the sunlight. Calamy stepped out from the dark and frowsty living-room of the cottage and walked up the steep path on to the road. He halted here and looked about him. The road at this point was terraced out of one of the sides of a deep valley. The ground rose steeply, in places almost precipitously, above it. Below it the green mountain meadows, brilliant in the sunshine and dotted here and there with clumps of chestnut trees, fell away into the depths of the valley, which the afternoon sun had left already in a vaporous smoky shadow. Profoundly shadowed, too, were the hills on the further side of the narrow cleft. Huge black masses, smoky with the same vapour as that which floated at the bottom of the valley, they rose up almost in silhouette against the bright light beyond. The sun looked down, over their clouded summits, across the intervening gulf, touching the green hillside, on the slope of which Calamy was standing, with a radiance that, in contrast to the dark hills opposite, seemed almost unearthly. To the right, at the head of the valley, a great pinnacle of naked rock, pale brown and streaked here and there with snow-white veins of marble, reached up into the clouds and above them, so that the summit shone like a precious stone in the sunlight, against the blue of the sky. A band of white vapour hung round the shoulders of the mountain. Beneath it appeared the lower buttresses of rock and the long slopes of hanging wood and meadowland falling away into the valley, all shadowy under the clouds, shadowy and dead, save where, here and there, a great golden beam broke through, touching some chosen tract of grass or woodland or rock with an intense and precarious life.</p>
			<p>Calamy stood for a long time looking out at the scene. How beautiful it was, how beautiful! Glittering in the light, the withering trees seemed to have prepared themselves as though for a feast. For a feast⁠—and yet it was winter and death that awaited them. Beautiful the mountains were, but menacing and terrible; terrible the deep gulf below him with its smoky vaporous shadows, far down, below the shining green. And the shadows mounted second after second as the sun declined. Beautiful, terrible and mysterious, pregnant with what enormous secret, symbolic of what formidable reality?</p>
			<p>From the direction of the cottage below the road came a tinkle of bells and the shrill shouting of a child’s voice. Half a dozen tall black and white goats, with long black beards, long twisted horns and yellow eyes, slitted with narrow pupils, came trotting up the slope, shaking their flat bells. A little boy scrambled after them, brandishing a stick and shouting words of command. To Calamy he touched his cap; they exchanged a few words in Italian, about the rain, the goats, the best pasture; then, waving his stick and peremptorily shouting at his little flock, the child moved on up the road. The goats trotted on in front, their hoofs clicking on the stones; every now and then they paused to pull a mouthful of grass from the bank at the side of the road; but the little boy would not let them pause. “<em xml:lang="it">Via!</em>” he shouted, and banged them with his stick. They bounded forward. Soon herdsman and flock were out of sight.</p>
			<p>If he had been born that little boy, Calamy wondered, would he still be working, unquestioningly, among these hills: tending the beasts, cutting wood; every now and then carting his faggots and his cheeses down the long road to Vezza? Would he, still, unquestioningly? Would he see that the mountains were beautiful, beautiful and terrible? Or would he find them merely ungrateful land, demanding great labour, giving little in return? Would he believe in heaven and hell? And fitfully, when anything went wrong, would he still earnestly invoke the aid of the infant Jesus, of the Blessed Virgin and <abbr>St.</abbr> Joseph, that patriarchal family trinity⁠—father, mother and baby⁠—of the Italian peasant? Would he have married? By this time, very likely, his eldest children would be ten or twelve years old⁠—driving the goats afield with shrill yellings and brandished sticks. Would he be living quietly and cheerfully the life of a young patriarch, happy in his children, his wife, his flocks and herds? Would he be happy to live thus, close to the earth, earthily, an ancient, instinctive, animally sagacious life? It seemed hardly imaginable. And yet, after all, it was likely enough. It needs a very strong, a passionately ardent spirit to disengage itself from childish tradition, from the life which circumstances impose upon it. Was his such a spirit?</p>
			<p>He was startled out of his speculations by the sound of his own name, loudly called from a little distance. He turned round and saw <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan and Chelifer striding up the road towards him. Calamy waved his hand and went to meet them. Was he pleased to see them or not? He hardly knew.</p>
			<p>“Well,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan, twinkling jovially, as he approached, “how goes life in the Thebaïd? Do you object to receiving a couple of impious visitors from Alexandria?”</p>
			<p>Calamy laughed and shook their hands without answering.</p>
			<p>“Did you get wet?” he asked, to change the conversation.</p>
			<p>“We hid in a cave,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan. He looked round at the view. “Pretty good,” he said encouragingly, as though it were Calamy who had made the landscape, “pretty good, I must say.”</p>
			<p>“Agreeably Wordsworthian,” said Chelifer in his precise voice.</p>
			<p>“And where do you live?” asked <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan.</p>
			<p>Calamy pointed to the cottage. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan nodded comprehendingly.</p>
			<p>“Hearts of gold, but a little niffy, eh?” he asked, lifting his raised white eyebrow still higher.</p>
			<p>“Not to speak of,” said Calamy.</p>
			<p>“Charming girls?” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan went on. “Or goitres?”</p>
			<p>“Neither,” said Calamy.</p>
			<p>“And how long do you propose to stay?”</p>
			<p>“I haven’t the faintest idea.”</p>
			<p>“Till you’ve got to the bottom of the cosmos, eh?”</p>
			<p>Calamy smiled. “That’s about it.”</p>
			<p>“Splendid,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan, patting him on the arm, “splendid. I envy you. God, what wouldn’t I give to be your age? What wouldn’t I give?” He shook his head sadly. “And, alas,” he added, “what could I give, in point of actual fact? I put it at about twelve hundred quid at the present time. My total fortune. Shouldn’t we sit down?” he added on another note.</p>
			<p>Calamy led the way down the little path. Along the front of the cottage, under the windows, ran a long bench. The three men sat down. The sun shone full upon them; it was pleasantly warm. Beneath them was the narrow valley with its smoky shadows; opposite, the black hills, cloud-capped and silhouetted against the brightness of the sky about the sun.</p>
			<p>“And the trip to Rome,” Calamy inquired, “was that agreeable?”</p>
			<p>“Tolerably,” said Chelifer, with precision.</p>
			<p>“And Miss Elver?” he addressed himself politely to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan looked up at him. “Hadn’t you heard?” he asked.</p>
			<p>“Heard what?”</p>
			<p>“She’s dead.” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan’s face became all at once very hard and still.</p>
			<p>“I’m sorry,” said Calamy. “I didn’t know.” He thought it more tactful to proffer no further condolences. There was a silence.</p>
			<p>“That’s something,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan at last, “that you’ll find it rather difficult to contemplate away, however long and mystically you stare at your navel.”</p>
			<p>“What?” asked Calamy.</p>
			<p>“Death,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan answered. “You can’t get over the fact that, at the end of everything, the flesh gets hold of the spirit, and squeezes the life out of it, so that a man turns into something that’s no better than a whining sick animal. And as the flesh sickens the spirit sickens, manifestly. Finally the flesh dies and putrefies; and the spirit presumably putrefies too. And there’s an end of your omphaloskepsis, with all its byproducts, God and justice and salvation and all the rest of them.”</p>
			<p>“Perhaps it is,” said Calamy. “Let’s admit it as certain, even. I don’t see that it makes the slightest difference.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>“No difference?”</p>
			<p>Calamy shook his head. “Salvation’s not in the next world; it’s in this. One doesn’t behave well here for the sake of a harp and wings after one is dead⁠—or even for the sake of contemplating throughout eternity the good, the true and the beautiful. If one desires salvation, it’s salvation here and now. The kingdom of God is within you⁠—if you’ll excuse the quotation,” he added, turning with a smile to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan. “The conquest of that kingdom, now, in this life⁠—that’s your salvationist’s ambition. There may be a life to come, or there may not; it’s really quite irrelevant to the main issue. To be upset because the soul may decay with the body is really medieval. Your medieval theologian made up for his really frightful cynicism about this world by a childish optimism about the next. Future justice was to compensate for the disgusting horrors of the present. Take away the life to come and the horrors remain, untempered and unpalliated.”</p>
			<p>“Quite so,” said Chelifer.</p>
			<p>“Seen from the medieval point of view,” Calamy went on, “the prospect is most disquieting. The Indians⁠—and for that matter the founder of Christianity⁠—supply the corrective with the doctrine of salvation in this life, irrespective of the life to come. Each man can achieve salvation in his own way.”</p>
			<p>“I’m glad you admit that,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan. “I was afraid you’d begin telling us that we all had to live on lettuces and look at our navels.”</p>
			<p>“I have it from no less an authority than yourself,” Calamy answered, laughing, “that there are⁠—how many?⁠—eighty-four thousand⁠—isn’t it?⁠—different ways of achieving salvation.”</p>
			<p>“Fully,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan, “and a great many more for going to the devil. But all this, my young friend,” he pursued, shaking his head, “doesn’t in any way mitigate the disagreeableness of slowly becoming <em>gaga</em>, dying and being eaten by worms. One may have achieved salvation in this life, certainly; but that makes it none the less insufferable that, at the end of the account, one’s soul should inevitably succumb to one’s body. I, for example, am saved⁠—I put the case quite hypothetically, mind you⁠—I have been living in a state of moral integrity and this-worldly salvation for the last half-century, ever since I reached the age of puberty. Let this be granted. Have I, for this reason, any the less cause to be distressed by the prospect, in a few years’ time, of becoming a senile imbecile, blind, deaf, toothless, witless, without interest in anything, partially paralysed, revolting to my fellows⁠—and all the rest of the Burtonian catalogue? When my soul is at the mercy of my slowly rotting body, what will be the use of salvation then?”</p>
			<p>“It will have profited during the fifty years of healthy life,” said Calamy.</p>
			<p>“But I’m talking about the unhealthy years,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan insisted, “when the soul’s at the mercy of the body.”</p>
			<p>Calamy was silent for a moment. “It’s difficult,” he said pensively, “it’s horribly difficult. The fundamental question is this: Can you talk of the soul being at the mercy of the body, can you give any kind of an explanation of mind in terms of matter? When you reflect that it’s the human mind that has invented space, time and matter, picking them out of reality in a quite arbitrary fashion⁠—can you attempt to explain a thing in terms of something it has invented itself? That’s the fundamental question.”</p>
			<p>“It’s like the question of the authorship of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Iliad</i>,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan. “The author of that poem is either Homer or, if not Homer, somebody else of the same name. Similarly, philosophically and even, according to the new physics, scientifically speaking, matter may not be matter, <em>really</em>. But the fact remains that something having all the properties we have always attributed to matter is perpetually getting in our way, and that our minds do, in point of fact, fall under the dominion of certain bits of this matter, known as our bodies, changing as they change and keeping pace with their decay.”</p>
			<p>Calamy ran his fingers perplexedly through his hair. “Yes, of course, it’s devilishly difficult,” he said. “You can’t help behaving <em>as if</em> things really were as they seem to be. At the same time, there <em>is</em> a reality which is totally different and which a change in our physical environment, a removal of our bodily limitations, would enable us to get nearer to. Perhaps by thinking hard enough⁠ ⁠…” He paused, shaking his head. “How many days did Gotama spend under the bo-tree? Perhaps if you spend long enough and your mind is the right sort of mind, perhaps you really do get, in some queer sort of way, beyond the limitations of ordinary existence. And you see that everything that seems real is in fact entirely illusory⁠—<em>maya</em>, in fact, the cosmic illusion. Behind it you catch a glimpse of reality.”</p>
			<p>“But what bosh your mystics talk about it,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan. “Have you ever read Boehme, for example? Lights and darknesses, wheels and compunctions, sweets and bitters, mercury, salt and sulphur⁠—it’s a rigmarole.”</p>
			<p>“It’s only to be expected,” said Calamy. “How is a man to give an account of something entirely unlike the phenomena of known existence in a language invented to describe these phenomena? You might give a deaf man a most detailed verbal description of the Fifth Symphony; but he wouldn’t be much the wiser for it, and he’d think you were talking pure balderdash⁠—which from his point of view you would be.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>“True,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan; “but I have my doubts whether any amount of sitting under bo-trees really makes it possible for anyone to wriggle out of human limitations and get behind phenomena.”</p>
			<p>“Well, I’m inclined to think that it does make it possible,” said Calamy. “There we must agree to differ. But even if it is impossible to get at reality, the fact that reality exists and is manifestly very different from what we ordinarily suppose it to be, surely throws some light on this horrible death business. Certainly, as things seem to happen, it’s as if the body did get hold of the soul and kill it. But the real facts of the case may be entirely different. The body as we know it is an invention of the mind. What is the reality on which the abstracting, symbolizing mind does its work of abstraction and symbolism? It is possible that, at death, we may find out. And in any case, what is death, <em>really</em>?”</p>
			<p>“It’s a pity,” put in Chelifer, in his dry, clear, accurate voice, “it’s a pity that the human mind didn’t do its job of invention a little better while it was about it. We might, for example, have made our symbolic abstraction of reality in such a way that it would be unnecessary for a creative and possibly immortal soul to be troubled with the haemorrhoids.”</p>
			<p>Calamy laughed. “Incorrigible sentimentalist!”</p>
			<p>“Sentimentalist?” echoed Chelifer, on a note of surprise.</p>
			<p>“A sentimentalist inside out,” said Calamy, nodding affirmatively. “Such wild romanticism as yours⁠—I imagined it had been extinct since the deposition of Louis-Philippe.”</p>
			<p>Chelifer laughed good-humouredly. “Perhaps you’re right,” he said. “Though I must say I myself should have handed out the prize for sentimentality to those who regard what is commonly known as reality⁠—the Harrow Road, for example, or the Café de la Rotonde in Paris⁠—as a mere illusion, who run away from it and devote their time and energy to occupations which <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan sums up and symbolizes in the word omphaloskepsis. Aren’t they the soft-heads, the all-too-susceptible and sentimental imbeciles?”</p>
			<p>“On the contrary,” Calamy replied, “in point of historical fact they’ve generally been men of the highest intelligence. Buddha, Jesus, Lao-tsze, Boehme, in spite of his wheels and compunctions, his salt and sulphur, Swedenborg. And what about Sir Isaac Newton, who practically abandoned mathematics for mysticism after he was thirty? Not that he was a particularly good mystic; he wasn’t. But he tried to be; and it can’t be said that he was remarkable for the softness of his head. No, it’s not fools who turn mystics. It takes a certain amount of intelligence and imagination to realize the extraordinary queerness and mysteriousness of the world in which we live. The fools, the innumerable fools, take it all for granted, skate about cheerfully on the surface and never think of inquiring what’s underneath. They’re content with appearances, such as your Harrow Road or Café de la Rotonde, call them realities and proceed to abuse anyone who takes an interest in what lies underneath these superficial symbols, as a romantic imbecile.”</p>
			<p>“But it’s cowardice to run away,” Chelifer insisted. “One has no right to ignore what for ninety-nine out of every hundred human beings is reality⁠—even though it mayn’t actually be the real thing. One has no right.”</p>
			<p>“Why not?” asked Calamy. “One has a right to be six foot nine inches high and to take sixteens in boots. One has a right, even though there are not more than three or four in every million like one. Why hasn’t one the right to be born with an unusual sort of mind, a mind that can’t be content with the surface-life of appearances?”</p>
			<p>“But such a mind is irrelevant, a freak,” said Chelifer. “In real life⁠—or if you prefer it, in the life that we treat as if it were real⁠—it’s the other minds that preponderate, that are the rule. The brutish minds. I repeat, you haven’t the right to run away from that. If you want to know what human life is, you must be courageous and live as the majority of human beings actually do live. It’s singularly revolting, I assure you.”</p>
			<p>“There you are again with your sentimentality,” complained Calamy. “You’re just the common variety of sentimentalist reversed. The ordinary kind pretends that so-called real life is more rosy than it actually is. The reversed sentimentalist gloats over its horrors. The bad principle is the same in both cases⁠—an excessive preoccupation with what is illusory. The man of sense sees the world of appearances neither too rosily nor too biliously and passes on. There is the ulterior reality to be looked for; it is more interesting.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>“Then you’d condemn out of hand all the countless human beings whose life is passed on the surface?”</p>
			<p>“Of course not,” Calamy replied. “Who would be such a fool as to condemn a fact? These people exist; it’s obvious. They have their choice of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan’s eighty-four thousand paths to salvation. The path I choose will probably be different from others. That’s all.”</p>
			<p>“Very likely,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan, who had been engaged in lighting a cigar, “very likely they’ll find the road to their salvation more easily than you will find the road to yours. Being simpler, they’ll have within them fewer causes for disharmony. Many of them are still practically in the tribal state, blindly obeying the social code that has been suggested into them from childhood. That’s the pre-lapsarian state; they’ve not yet eaten of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil⁠—or rather it’s the whole tribe, not the individual, that has eaten. And the individual is so much a part of the tribe that it doesn’t occur to him to act against its ordinances, any more than it occurs to my teeth to begin violently biting my tongue of their own accord. Those simple souls⁠—and there are still a lot of them left, even among the motor buses⁠—will find their way to salvation very easily. The difficulty begins when the individuals begin to get thoroughly conscious of themselves apart from the tribe. There’s an immense number of people who ought to be tribal savages, but who have been made conscious of their individuality. They can’t obey tribal morality blindly and they’re too feeble to think for themselves. I should say that the majority of people in a modern educated democratic state are at that stage⁠—too conscious of themselves to obey blindly, too inept to be able to behave in a reasonable manner on their own account. Hence that delightful contemporary state of affairs which so rejoices the heart of our friend Chelifer. We fall most horribly between two stools⁠—the tribe and the society of conscious intelligent beings.”</p>
			<p>“It’s comforting to think,” said Chelifer, “that modern civilization is doing its best to reestablish the tribal regime, but on an enormous, national and even international scale. Cheap printing, wireless telephones, trains, motor cars, gramophones and all the rest are making it possible to consolidate tribes, not of a few thousands, but of millions. To judge from the Middle Western novelists, the process seems already to have gone a long way in America. In a few generations it may be that the whole planet will be covered by one vast American-speaking tribe, composed of innumerable individuals, all thinking and acting in exactly the same way, like the characters in a novel by Sinclair Lewis. It’s a most pleasing speculation⁠—though, of course,” Chelifer added guardedly, “the future is no concern of ours.”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan nodded and puffed at his cigar. “That’s certainly a possibility,” he said. “A probability almost; for I don’t see that it’s in the least likely that we shall be able to breed a race of beings, at any rate within the next few thousand years, sufficiently intelligent to be able to form a stable non-tribal society. Education has made the old tribalism impossible and has done nothing⁠—nor ever will do anything⁠—to make the non-tribal society possible. It will be necessary, therefore, if we require social stability, to create a new kind of tribalism, on the basis of universal education for the stupid, using the press, wireless and all the rest as the instruments by which the new order is to be established. In a generation or two of steady conscious work it ought to be possible, as Chelifer says, to turn all but two or three hundred in every million of the inhabitants of the planet into Babbitts.”</p>
			<p>“Perhaps a slightly lower standard would be necessary,” suggested Chelifer.</p>
			<p>“It’s a remarkable thing,” pursued <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan meditatively, “that the greatest and most influential reformer of modern times, Tolstoy, should also have proposed a reversion to tribalism as the sole remedy to civilized restlessness and uncertainty of purpose. But while we propose a tribalism based on the facts⁠—or should I say the appearances?”⁠—<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan twinkled amicably at Calamy⁠—“of modern life, Tolstoy proposed a return to the genuine, primordial, uneducated, dirty tribalism of the savage. That won’t do, of course; because it’s hardly probable, once they have tasted it, that men will allow <i xml:lang="fr">le confort moderne</i>, as they call it in hotels, to be taken from them. Our suggestion is the more practicable⁠—the creation of a planet-wide tribe of Babbitts. They’d be much easier to propagate, now, than muzhiks. But still the principle remains the same in both projects⁠—a return to the tribal state. And when Tolstoy and Chelifer and myself agree about anything, believe me,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan, “there’s something in it. By the way,” he added, “I hope we haven’t been hurting your susceptibilities, Calamy. You’re not muzhiking up here, are you? Digging and killing pigs and so on. Are you? I trust not.”</p>
			<p>Calamy shook his head, laughing. “I cut wood in the mornings, for exercise,” he said. “But not on principle, I assure you, not on principle.”</p>
			<p>“Ah, that’s all right,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan. “I was afraid you might be doing it on principle.”</p>
			<p>“It would be a stupidity,” said Calamy. “What would be the point of doing badly something for which I have no aptitude; something, moreover, which would prevent me from doing the thing for which it seems to me just possible I may have some native capacity.”</p>
			<p>“And what, might I ask,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan with an assumed diffidence and tactful courtesy, “what may that thing be?”</p>
			<p>“That’s rather biting,” said Calamy, smiling. “But you may well ask. For it has certainly been hard to see, until now, what my peculiar talent was. I’ve not even known myself. Was it making love? or riding? or shooting antelopes in Africa? or commanding a company of infantry? or desultory reading at lightning speeds? or drinking champagne? or a good memory? or my bass voice? Or what? I’m inclined to think it was the first: making love.”</p>
			<p>“Not at all a bad talent,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan judicially.</p>
			<p>“But not, I find, one that one can go on cultivating indefinitely,” said Calamy. “And the same is true of the others⁠—true at any rate for me.⁠ ⁠… No, if I had no aptitudes but those, I might certainly as well devote myself exclusively to digging the ground. But I begin to find in myself a certain aptitude for meditation which seems to me worth cultivating. And I doubt if one can cultivate meditation at the same time as the land. So I only cut wood for exercise.”</p>
			<p>“That’s good,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan. “I should be sorry to think you were doing anything actively useful. You retain the instincts of a gentleman; that’s excellent.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>“Satan!” said Calamy, laughing. “But do you suppose I don’t know very well that you can make out the most damning case against the idle anchorite who sits looking at his navel while other people work? Do you suppose I haven’t thought of that?”</p>
			<p>“I’m sure you have,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan answered, genially twinkling.</p>
			<p>“The case looks damning enough, no doubt. But it’s only really cogent when the anchorite doesn’t do his job properly, when he’s born to be active and not contemplative. The imbeciles who rush about bawling that action is the end of life, and that thought has no value except in so far as it leads to action, are speaking only for themselves. There are eighty-four thousand paths. The pure contemplative has a right to one of them.”</p>
			<p>“I should be the last to deny it,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan.</p>
			<p>“And if I find that it’s not my path,” pursued Calamy, “I shall turn back and try what can be done in the way of practical life. Up till now, I must say I’ve not seen much hope for myself that way. But then, it must be admitted, I didn’t look for the road in places where I was very likely to find it.”</p>
			<p>“What has always seemed to me to be the chief objection to protracted omphaloskepsis,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan, after a little silence, “is the fact that you’re left too much to your personal resources; you have to live on your own mental fat, so to speak, instead of being able to nourish yourself from outside. And to know yourself becomes impossible; because you can’t know yourself except in relation to other people.”</p>
			<p>“That’s true,” said Calamy. “Part of yourself you can certainly get to know only in relation to what is outside. In the course of twelve or fifteen years of adult life I think I’ve got to know that part of me very thoroughly. I’ve met a lot of people, been in a great many curious situations, so that almost every potentiality latent in that part of my being has had a chance to unfold itself into actuality. Why should I go on? There’s nothing more I really want to know about that part of myself; nothing more, of any significance, I imagine, that I could get to know by contact with what is external. On the other hand, there is a whole universe within me, unknown and waiting to be explored; a whole universe that can only be approached by way of introspection and patient uninterrupted thought. Merely to satisfy curiosity it would surely be worth exploring. But there are motives more impelling than curiosity to persuade me. What one may find there is so important that it’s almost a matter of life and death to undertake the search.”</p>
			<p>“Hm,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan. “And what will happen at the end of three months’ chaste meditation when some lovely young temptation comes toddling down this road, ‘balancing her haunches,’ as Zola would say, and rolling the large black eye? What will happen to your explorations of the inward universe then, may I ask?”</p>
			<p>“Well,” said Calamy, “I hope they’ll proceed uninterrupted.”</p>
			<p>“You hope? Piously?”</p>
			<p>“And I shall certainly do my best to see that they do,” Calamy added.</p>
			<p>“It won’t be easy,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan assured him.</p>
			<p>“I know.”</p>
			<p>“Perhaps you’ll find that you can explore simultaneously both the temptation and the interior universe.”</p>
			<p>Calamy shook his head. “Alas, I’m afraid that’s not practicable. It would be delightful if it were. But for some reason it isn’t. Even in moderation it won’t do. I know that, more or less, by experience. And the authorities are all agreed about it.”</p>
			<p>“But after all,” said Chelifer, “there have been religions that prescribed indulgence in these particular temptations as a discipline and ceremony at certain seasons and to celebrate certain feasts.”</p>
			<p>“But they didn’t pretend,” Calamy answered, “that it was a discipline that made it easy for those who underwent it to explore the inward universe of mind.”</p>
			<p>“Perhaps they did,” objected Chelifer. “After all, there’s no golden rule. At one time and in one place you honour your father and your mother when they grow old; elsewhere and at other periods you knock them on the head and put them into the <i xml:lang="fr">pot-au-feu</i>. Everything has been right at one time or another and everything has been wrong.”</p>
			<p>“That’s only true with reservations,” said Calamy, “and the reservations are the most important part. There’s a parallel, it seems to me, between the moral and the physical world. In the physical world you call the unknowable reality the Four-Dimensional Continuum. The Continuum is the same for all observers; but when they want to draw a picture of it for themselves, they select different axes for their graphs, according to their different motions⁠—and according to their different minds and physical limitations. Human beings have selected three-dimensional space and time as their axes. Their minds, their bodies and the earth on which they live being what they are, human beings could not have done otherwise. Space and time are necessary and inevitable ideas for us. And when we want to draw a picture of that other reality in which we live⁠—is it different, or is it somehow, incomprehensibly, the same?⁠—we choose, unescapably⁠—we cannot fail to choose, those axes of reference which we call good and evil; the laws of our being make it necessary for us to see things under the aspects of good and evil. The reality remains the same; but the axes vary with the mental position, so to speak, and the varying capacities of different observers. Some observers are clearer-sighted and in some way more advantageously placed than others. The incessantly changing social conventions and moral codes of history represent the shifting axes of reference chosen by the least curious, most myopic and worst-placed observers. But the axes chosen by the best observers have always been startlingly like one another. Gotama, Jesus and Lao-tsze, for example; they lived sufficiently far from one another in space, time and social position. But their pictures of reality resemble one another very closely. The nearer a man approaches these in penetration, the more nearly will his axes of moral reference correspond with theirs. And when all the most acute observers agree in saying that indulgence in these particular amusements interferes with the exploration of the spiritual world, then one can be pretty sure it’s true. In itself, no doubt, the natural and moderate satisfaction of the sexual instincts is a matter quite indifferent to morality. It is only in relation to something else that the satisfaction of a natural instinct can be said to be good or bad. It might be bad, for example, if it involved deceit or cruelty. It is certainly bad when it enslaves a mind that feels, within itself, that it ought to be free⁠—free to contemplate and recollect itself.”</p>
			<p>“No doubt,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan. “But as a practical man, I can only say that it’s going to be most horribly difficult to preserve that freedom. That balancing of haunches⁠ ⁠…” He waved his cigar from side to side. “I shall call again in six months and see how you feel about it all then. It’s extraordinary what an effect the natural appetites do have on good resolutions. Satiated, one thinks regeneration will be so easy; but when one’s hungry again, how hard it seems.”</p>
			<p>They were silent. From the depths of the valley the smoky shadows had climbed higher and higher up the slope. The opposite hills were now profoundly black and the clouds in which their peaks were involved had become dark and menacing save where, on their upper surfaces, the sun touched them with, as it declined, an ever richer light. The shadow had climbed up to within a hundred feet of where they were sitting, soon it would envelop them. With a great jangling of bells and a clicking of small hard hoofs the six tall piebald goats came trotting down the steep path from the road. The little boy ran behind them, waving his stick. “<em>Eia-oo!</em>” he shouted with a kind of Homeric fury; but at the sight of the three men sitting on the bench outside the house he suddenly became silent, blushed and slunk unheroically away, hardly daring to whisper to the goats while he drove them into their stable for the night.</p>
			<p>“Dear me,” said Chelifer, who had followed the movements of the animals with a certain curiosity, “I believe those are the first goats I have seen, or smelt, in the flesh since I took to writing about them in my paper. Most interesting. One tends to forget that the creatures really exist.”</p>
			<p>“One tends to forget that anything or anyone really exists, outside oneself,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan. “It’s always a bit of a shock to find that they do.”</p>
			<p>“Three days hence,” said Chelifer meditatively, “I shall be at my office again. Rabbits, goats, mice; Fetter Lane; the family <i xml:lang="fr">pension</i>. All the familiar horrors of reality.”</p>
			<p>“Sentimentalist!” mocked Calamy.</p>
			<p>“Meanwhile,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan, “Lilian has suddenly decided to move on to Monte Carlo. I go with her, of course; one can’t reject free meals when they’re offered.” He threw away his cigar, got up and stretched himself. “Well, we must be getting down before it gets dark.”</p>
			<p>“I shan’t see you again for some time, then?” said Calamy.</p>
			<p>“I shall be here again at the end of six months, never fear,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan. “Even if I have to come at my own expense.”</p>
			<p>They climbed up the steep little path on to the road.</p>
			<p>“Goodbye.”</p>
			<p>“Goodbye.”</p>
			<p>Calamy watched them go, watched them till they were out of sight round a bend in the road. A profound melancholy settled down upon him. With them, he felt, had gone all his old, familiar life. He was left quite alone with something new and strange. What was to come of this parting?</p>
			<p>Or perhaps, he reflected, nothing would come of it. Perhaps he had been a fool.</p>
			<p>The cottage was in the shadow now. Looking up the slope he could see a clump of trees still glittering as though prepared for a festival above the rising flood of darkness. And at the head of the valley, like an immense precious stone, glowing with its own inward fire, the limestone crags reached up through the clouds into the pale sky. Perhaps he had been a fool, thought Calamy. But looking at that shining peak, he was somehow reassured.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
