<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>VII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-2" id="chapter-2-7" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</h3>
			<p>No escape.⁠ ⁠… But I was still tipsy enough not seriously to desire escape. My premonition of sobriety had been no more than a momentary flash. It came and it passed again, almost immediately, as I became once more absorbed in what seemed to me the endless and lovely comedy that was being acted all around me. It was enough for me that I existed and that things were happening to me. I was carried by two or three young giants to the hotel, I was dressed, my clothes were packed for me. In the entrance hall, while I was waiting for <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Aldwinkle to come and fetch me, I made some essays at walking; the feebleness of my legs was a source to me of delighted laughter.</p>
			<p>Dressed in pale yellow tussore with a large straw hat on her head, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Aldwinkle finally appeared. Her guests, she explained, had gone home in another machine; I should be able to lie flat, or very nearly, in her empty car. And in case I felt bad⁠—she shook a silver brandy flask at me. Escape? I did not so much as think of it, I was enchanted.</p>
			<p>Luxuriously I reclined among the cushions. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Aldwinkle tapped the forward-looking window. The chauffeur languidly moved his hand and the machine rolled forward, nosing its way through the crowd of admiring car-fanciers which, in Italy, collects as though by magic round every stationary automobile. And <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Aldwinkle’s was a particularly attractive specimen. Young men called to their friends: “<i xml:lang="it">Venite. È una Ro-Ro.</i>” And in awed voices little boys whispered to one another: “<i xml:lang="it">Una Ro-Ro.</i>” The crowd reluctantly dispersed before our advance; we glided away from before the Grand Hotel, turned into the main street, crossed the piazza, in the centre of which, stranded high and dry by the receding sea, stood the little pink fort which had been built by the Princes of Massa Carrara to keep watch on a Mediterranean made dangerous by Barbary pirates, and rolled out of the village by the road leading across the plain towards the mountains.</p>
			<p>Shuffling along in a slowly moving cloud of dust, a train of white oxen advanced, shambling and zigzagging along the road to meet us. Eight yoke of them there were, a long procession, with half a dozen drivers shouting and tugging at the leading ropes and cracking their whips. They were dragging a low truck, clamped to which was a huge monolith of flawless white marble. Uneasily, as we crawled past them, the animals shook their heads, turning this way and that, as though desperately seeking some way of escape. Their long curving horns clashed together; their soft white dewlaps shook; and into their blank brown eyes there came a look of fear, an entreaty that we should take pity on their invincible stupidity and remember that they simply could not, however hard they tried, get used to motor cars.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Aldwinkle pointed at the monolith. “Imagine what Michelangelo could have made out of that,” she said. Then, noticing that her pointing hand still grasped the silver flask, she became very solicitous. “You’re sure you wouldn’t like a sip of this?” she asked, leaning forward. The twin blue danger signals glittered in my face. Her garments exhaled a scent in which there was ambergris. Her breath smelt of heliotrope cachous. But even now I did not take fright; I made no effort to escape. Guided by their invincible stupidity, the white oxen had behaved more sensibly than I.</p>
			<p>We rolled on. The hills came nearer. The faraway peaks of bare limestone were hidden by the glowing mass of the tilled and wooded foothills. Happily I looked at those huge hilly forms. “How beautiful!” I said. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Aldwinkle seemed to take my words as a personal compliment.</p>
			<p>“I’m so glad you think so. So awfully⁠ ⁠…” she replied in the tone of an author to whom you have just said that you enjoyed his last book so much.</p>
			<p>We drew nearer; the hills towered up, they opposed themselves like a huge wall. But the barrier parted before us; we passed through the gates of a valley that wound up into the mountain. Our road now ran parallel with the bed of a torrent. In the flanks of the hill to our right a marble quarry made a huge bare scar, hundreds of feet long. The crest of the hill was fringed with a growth of umbrella pines. The straight slender tree trunks jetted up thirty feet without a branch; their wide-spreading flattened domes of foliage formed a thin continuous silhouette, between which and the dark mass of the hill one could see a band of sky, thinly barred by the bare stems. It was as though, to emphasize the outlines of his hills, an artist had drawn a fine and supple brush stroke parallel with the edge of the silhouette and a little apart from it.</p>
			<p>We rolled on. The high road narrowed into the squalid street of a little town. The car crept along, hooting as it went.</p>
			<p>“Vezza,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Aldwinkle explained. “Michelangelo used to come here for his marbles.”</p>
			<p>“Indeed?” I was charmed to hear it.</p>
			<p>Over the windows of a large shop filled with white crosses, broken columns and statues, I read the legend: “Anglo-American Tombstone Company.” We emerged from the narrow street on to an embankment running along the edge of a river. From the opposite bank the ground rose steeply.</p>
			<p>“There,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Aldwinkle on a note of triumph as we crossed the bridge, “that’s my house.” She pointed up. From the hilltop a long façade stared down through twenty windows; a tall tower pricked the sky. “The palace was built in 1630,” she began. I even enjoyed the history lesson.</p>
			<p>We had crossed the bridge, we were climbing by a steep and winding road through what was almost a forest of olive trees. The abrupt grassy slope had been built up into innumerable little terraces on which the trees were planted. Here and there, in the grey luminous shadow beneath the trees, little flocks of sheep were grazing. The barefooted children who attended them came running to the side of the road to watch us passing.</p>
			<p>“I like to think of these old princely courts,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Aldwinkle was saying. “Like abbeys of⁠ ⁠… abbeys of⁠ ⁠…” She shook her brandy flask impatiently. “You know⁠ ⁠… in Thingumy.”</p>
			<p>“Abbeys of Thelema,” I suggested.</p>
			<p>“That’s it,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Aldwinkle. “Sort of retiring-places where people were free to live intelligently. That’s what I want to make this house. I’m so delighted to have met you like this. You’re exactly the sort of person I want.” She leaned forward, smiling and glittering. But even at the prospect of entering the Abbey of Thelema I did not blench.</p>
			<p>At this moment the car passed through a huge gateway. I caught a glimpse of a great flight of steps, set between cypresses, mounting up past a series of terraced landings to a carved doorway in the centre of the long façade. The road turned, the car swung round and the vista was closed. By an ilex avenue that wound round the flank of the hill we climbed more gradually towards the house, which we approached from the side. The road landed us finally in a large square court opposite a shorter reproduction of the great façade. At the head of a double flight of steps, curving horseshoe fashion from the landing at its threshold, a tall pompous doorway surmounted by a coat of arms cavernously invited. The car drew up.</p>
			<p>And about time too, as I notice on rereading what I have written. Few things are more profoundly boring and unprofitable than literary descriptions. For the writer, it is true, there is a certain amusement to be derived from the hunt for apt expressive words. Carried away by the excitement of the chase he dashes on, regardless of the poor readers who follow toilsomely through his stiff and clayey pages like the runners at the tail of a hunt, seeing nothing of the fun. All writers are also readers⁠—though perhaps I should make exceptions in favour of a few of my colleagues who make a speciality of native wood-notes⁠—and must therefore know how dreary description is. But that does not prevent them from inflicting upon others all that they themselves have suffered. Indeed I sometimes think that some authors must write as they do purely out of a desire for revenge.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Aldwinkle’s other guests had arrived and were waiting for us. I was introduced and found them all equally charming. The little niece rushed to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Aldwinkle’s assistance; the young man who had rowed the <i xml:lang="it">patino</i> rushed in his turn to the little niece’s and insisted on carrying all the things of which she had relieved her aunt. The old man with the red face, who had talked about the clouds, looked on benevolently at this little scene. But another elderly gentleman with a white beard, whom I had not seen before, seemed to view it with a certain disapproval. The young lady who had talked about the whiteness of her legs and who turned out to be my distinguished colleague, Miss Mary Thriplow, was now dressed in a little green frock with a white turned-down collar, white cuffs and buttons, which made her look like a schoolgirl in a comic opera by Offenbach. The brown young man stood near her.</p>
			<p>I got out of the car, refused all proffered assistance and contrived, a little wamblingly, it is true, to mount the steps.</p>
			<p>“You must be very careful for a little,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Aldwinkle with a maternal solicitude. “These,” she added, waving her hand in the direction of a vista of empty saloons, the entrance to which we were just then passing, “these are the apartments of the Princesses.”</p>
			<p>We walked right through the house into a great quadrangle surrounded on three sides by buildings and on the fourth, towards the rising hill, by an arcade. On a pedestal in the centre of the court stood a more than life-sized marble statue, representing, my hostess informed me, the penultimate Prince of Massa Carrara, wearing a very curly full-bottomed wig, Roman kilts, buskins, and one of those handsome classical breastplates which have the head of a Gorgon embossed in the middle of the chest and a little dimple to indicate the position of the navel in the middle of the round and polished belly. With the expression of one who is about to reveal a delightful secret and who can hardly wait until the moment of revelation comes to give vent to his pleasure, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Aldwinkle, smiling as it were below the surface of her face, led me to the foot of the statue. “Look!” she said. It was one of those pretty peepshows on which, for the sake of five minutes’ amusement and titillation of the eye, Grand Monarchs used to spend the value of a rich province. From the central arch of the arcade a flight of marble steps climbed up to where, set against a semicircle of cypresses, at the crest of the hill, a little round temple played gracefully at paganism, just as the buskined and corseleted statue in the court below played heroically at Plutarch.</p>
			<p>“And now look here!” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Aldwinkle; and taking me round to the other side of the statue, she led me towards a great door in the centre of the long range of buildings opposite the arcade. It was open; a vaulted corridor, like a tunnel, led clean through the house. Through it I could see the blue sky and the remote horizon of the sea. We walked along it; from the further threshold I found myself looking down the flight of steps which I had seen from below, at the entrance gate. It was a stage scene, but made of solid marble and with growing trees.</p>
			<p>“What do you think of that?” asked <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Aldwinkle.</p>
			<p>“Magnificent,” I answered, with an enthusiasm that was beginning to be tempered by a growing physical weariness.</p>
			<p>“Such a view,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Aldwinkle, poking at it with the tip of her sunshade. “The contrast between the cypresses and the olive trees⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>“But the view’s still lovelier from the temple,” said the little niece, who was evidently very anxious to make me realize the full pricelessness of her Aunt Lilian’s possessions.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Aldwinkle turned on her. “How utterly thoughtless you are!” she said severely. “Do try to remember that poor <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Chelifer is still suffering from the effects of his accident. And you expect him to go climbing up to the temple!”</p>
			<p>The little niece blushed and drooped beneath the reproach. We sat down.</p>
			<p>“How are you feeling now?” asked <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Aldwinkle, remembering once more to be solicitous.⁠ ⁠… “Too appalling to think,” she added, “how nearly⁠ ⁠… And I’ve always so enormously admired your work.”</p>
			<p>“So have I,” declared my colleague in the green frock. “Most awfully. Still, I confess, I find some of your things a little, how shall I say, a little alembicated. I like my poetry to be rather straightforwarder.”</p>
			<p>“A very sophisticated desire,” said the red-faced gentleman. “Really simple, primitive people like their poetry to be as complicated, conventional, artificial and remote from the language of everyday affairs as possible. We reproach the eighteenth century with its artificiality. But the fact is that <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Beowulf</i> is couched in a diction fifty times more complicated and unnatural than that of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Essay on Man</i>. And when you compare the Icelandic Sagas with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Johnson, you find that it’s the Doctor who lisps and prattles. Only the most complicated people, living in the midst of the most artificial surroundings, desire their poetry to be simple and straightforward.”</p>
			<p>I shut my eyes and allowed the waves of conversation to roll over me. And what a classy conversation! Prince Papadiamantopoulos could hardly have kept the ball rolling on a higher level. Fatigue was sobering me.</p>
			<p>Fatigue, the body’s weariness⁠—some industrious little scientific emmet ought to catalogue and measure all its various effects. All⁠—for it isn’t enough to show that when wage-slaves have worked too long they tend to fall into the machines and get pulped. The fact is interesting, no doubt; but there are other facts of no less significance. There is the fact, for example, that slight fatigue increases our capacity for sentiment. Those compromising love letters are always written in the small hours; it is at night, not when we are fresh and reposed, that we talk about ideal love and indulge our griefs. Under the influence of slight fatigue we feel more ready than at other times to discuss the problems of the universe, to make confidences, to dogmatize about the nature of God and to draw up plans for the future. We are also inclined to be more languidly voluptuous. When, however, the fatigue is increased beyond a certain point, we cease entirely to be sentimental, voluptuous, metaphysical or confiding. We cease to be aware of anything but the decrepitude of our being. We take no further interest in other people or the outside world⁠—no further interest unless they will not leave us in peace, when we come to hate them with a deep but ineffectual loathing, mingled with disgust.</p>
			<p>With me, fatigue had almost suddenly passed the critical point. My convalescent’s delight in the world evaporated. My fellow beings no longer seemed to me beautiful, strange and amiable. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Aldwinkle’s attempts to bring me into the conversation exasperated me; when I looked at her, I thought her a monster. I realized, too late (which made the realization the more vexatious), what I had let myself in for when I accepted <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Aldwinkle’s invitation. Fantastic surroundings, art, classy chats about the cosmos, the intelligentsia, love.⁠ ⁠… It was too much, even on a holiday.</p>
			<p>I shut my eyes. Sometimes, when <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Aldwinkle interpellated me, I said yes or no, without much regard to the sense of her remark. Discussion raged around me. From the alembication of my poetry they had gone on to art in general. Crikey, I said to myself, crikey.⁠ ⁠… I did my best to close the ears of my mind; and for some little time I did, indeed, contrive to understand nothing of what was said. I thought of Miss Carruthers, of Fluffy and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Brimstone, of Gog’s Court and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Bosk.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Aldwinkle’s voice, raised by irritation to a peculiar loudness, made itself audible to my muffled mind. “How often have I told you, Cardan,” it said, “that you understand nothing of modern art?”</p>
			<p>“At least a thousand times,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan replied cheerfully. “But bless your heart,” he added (and I opened my eyes in time to see his benevolent smile), “I never mind at all.”</p>
			<p>The smile was evidently too much for <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Aldwinkle’s patience. With the gesture of a queen who implies that the audience is at an end she rose from her seat. “Just time,” she said, looking at her watch, “there’s just time. I really must give <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Chelifer some idea of the inside of the palace before lunch. You’d like to come?” She smiled at me like a siren.</p>
			<p>Too polite to remind her of her recent outburst against the little niece, I declared myself delighted by the idea. Wamblingly I followed her into the house. Behind me I heard the young rower exclaiming on a note of mingled astonishment and indignation: “But a moment ago she was saying that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Chelifer was too ill to⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>“Ah, but that was different,” said the voice of the red-faced man.</p>
			<p>“Why was it different?”</p>
			<p>“Because, my young friend, the other fellow is in all cases the rule; but <em>I</em> am invariably the exception. Shall we follow?”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Aldwinkle made me look at painted ceilings till I almost fell down from giddiness. She dragged me through room after baroque room; then drove me up dark stairs into the Middle Ages. By the time we were back in the <i xml:lang="it">trecento</i> I was so much exhausted that I could hardly stand. My knees trembled, I felt sick.</p>
			<p>“This is the old armoury,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Aldwinkle with mounting enthusiasm. “And there are the stairs leading up to the tower.” She pointed to a low archway, through which, in a dusty twilight, the bottom of a steep stair could be seen corkscrewing up to unknown heights. “There are two hundred and thirty-two steps,” she added.</p>
			<p>At this moment the gong for luncheon rumbled remotely from the other end of the huge empty house.</p>
			<p>“Thank God!” said the red-faced man devoutly.</p>
			<p>But our hostess, it was evident, had no feeling for punctuality. “What a bore!” she exclaimed. “But never mind. We can make time. I wanted just to run up the tower before lunch. There’s such a wonderful bird’s-eye⁠ ⁠…” She looked inquiringly round. “What do you think, all of you? Shouldn’t we just dash up? It won’t take a minute.” She repeated the siren smile. “Do let’s. Do!” And without waiting for the result of her plebiscite she walked rapidly towards the stairs.</p>
			<p>I followed her. But before I had taken five steps, the floor, the walls of the room seemed to fade into the distance. There was a roaring in my ears. It grew suddenly dark. I felt myself falling. For the second time since breakfast I lost consciousness.</p>
			<p>When I came to, I was lying on the floor, with my head on <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Aldwinkle’s knees; and she was dabbing my forehead with a wet sponge. The first objects of which I was aware were her bright blue eyes hanging over me, very close, very bright and alarming. “Poor fellow,” she was saying, “poor fellow.” Then, looking up, she shouted angrily to the owners of the various legs and skirts which I distinguished mistily to right and left of me: “Stand back, you must stand back! Do you want to suffocate the poor fellow?”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
