<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>V</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-3" id="chapter-3-5" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</h3>
			<p>“When the butcher’s boy tells you in confidence, and with an eye to a tip, that the grocer’s brother has a very fine piece of very old sculpture which he is prepared to part with for a moderate consideration, what do you suppose he means?” Walking slowly uphill among the olive trees, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan meditatively put the question.</p>
			<p>“I suppose he means what he says,” said Miss Thriplow.</p>
			<p>“No doubt,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan, halting for a moment to wipe his face, which shone, even though the sun came only slantingly through the thin foliage of the olive trees, with an excess of heat. Miss Thriplow in the green uniform of the musical comedy schoolgirl looked wonderfully cool and neat beside her unbuttoned companion. “But the point is this: what exactly is it that he says? What is a butcher’s boy likely to mean when he says that a piece of sculpture is very beautiful and very old?” They resumed their climbing. Below them, through a gap in the trees, they could see the roofs and the slender tower of the Cybo Malaspina palace, and below these again the dolls’ village of Vezza, the map-like plain, the sea.</p>
			<p>“I should ask him, if you want to know.” Miss Thriplow spoke rather tartly; it was not to talk of butchers’ boys that she had accepted <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan’s invitation to go for a walk with him. She wanted to hear <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan’s views on life, literature and herself. He knew a thing or two, it seemed to her, about all these subjects. Too many things, and not exactly the right ones at that, about the last. Too many⁠—it was precisely for that reason that Miss Thriplow liked to talk with him. Horrors always exercise a fascination. And now, after the prolonged silence, he was starting on butchers’ boys.</p>
			<p>“I have asked him,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan. “But do you suppose there’s anything intelligible to be got out of him? All I can gather is that the sculpture represents a man⁠—not a whole man, part of a man, and that it’s made of marble. Beyond that I can discover nothing.”</p>
			<p>“Why do you want to discover?” asked Miss Thriplow.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan shook his head. “Alas,” he said, “for sordid reasons. You remember what the poet wrote?</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>I have been in love, in debt and in drink</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This many and many a year;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And these are three evils too great, one would think,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For one poor mortal to bear.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Twas love that first drove me to drinking,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And drinking first drove me to debt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And though I have struggled and struggled and strove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I cannot get out of them yet.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There’s nothing but money can cure me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ease me of all my pain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Twill pay all my debts and remove all my lets,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And my mistress who cannot endure me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will turn to and love me again,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will turn to and love me again.</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p class="continued">There’s a summary of a lifetime for you. One has no regrets, of course. But still, one does need cash⁠—needs it the more, alas, the older one grows, and has less of it. What other reason, do you think, would send me sweating up this hill to talk with the village grocer about his brother’s statuary?”</p>
			<p>“You mean that you’d buy it if it were worth anything?”</p>
			<p>“At the lowest possible price,” confirmed <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan. “And sell it at the highest. If I had ever adopted a profession,” he continued, “I think it would have been art dealing. It has the charm of being more dishonest than almost any other form of licensed brigandage in existence. And dishonest, moreover, in a much more amusing way. Financiers, it is true, can swindle on a larger scale; but their swindling is mostly impersonal. You may ruin thousands of trusting investors; but you haven’t the pleasure of knowing your victims. Whereas if you’re an art dealer, your swindling, though less extensive, is most amusingly personal. You meet your victims face to face and do them down. You take advantage of the ignorance or urgent poverty of the vendor to get the work for nothing. You then exploit the snobbery and the almost equally profound ignorance of the rich buyer to make him take the stuff off your hands at some fantastic price. What huge elation one must feel when one has succeeded in bringing off some splendid coup! bought a blackened panel from some decayed gentleman in need of a new suit, cleaned it up and sold it again to a rich snob who thinks that a collection and the reputation of being a patron of the ancient arts will give him a leg up in society⁠—what vast Rabelaisian mirth! No, decidedly, if I were not Diogenes and idle, I would be Alexander, critic and dealer. A really gentlemanly profession.”</p>
			<p>“Can you never be serious?” asked Miss Thriplow, who would have preferred the conversation to turn on something more nearly related to her own problems.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan smiled at her. “Can anybody fail to be serious when it’s a question of making money?”</p>
			<p>“I give you up,” said Miss Thriplow.</p>
			<p>“I’m sorry,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan protested. “But perhaps it’s all for the best. Meanwhile, what about that butcher’s boy? What <em>does</em> he mean by a bit of very old sculpture? Is it the head of some rich Etruscan cheese-monger of Lunae that they’ve dug up? Some long-nosed primitive oriental with a smile of imbecile rapture on his face? Or a fragment of one of his Hellenized posterity, reclining on the lid of his sarcophagus as though along his prandial couch and staring blankly out of a head that might, if Praxiteles had carved it, have been Apollo’s, but which the Etruscan mason has fattened into an all too human grossness? Or perhaps it’s a Roman bust, so thoroughly real, lifelike and up-to-date that, but for the toga, we might almost take it for our old friend Sir William Midrash, the eminent civil servant. Or perhaps⁠—and I should like that better⁠—perhaps it dates from that strange, grey Christian dawn that followed the savage night into which the empire went down. I can imagine some fragment from Modena or Toscanella⁠—some odd, unpredictable figure bent by excess of faith into the most profoundly expressive and symbolic of attitudes: a monster physically, a barbarism, a little mumbo-jumbo, but glowing so passionately with inward life⁠—it may be lovely, it may be malignant⁠—that it is impossible to look at it with indifference or merely as a shape, ugly or beautiful. Yes. I should like the thing to be a piece of Romanesque carving. I’d give the butcher’s boy an extra five francs if it were. But if it turned out to be one of those suave Italian Gothic saints elegantly draped and leaning a little sideways, like saplings in the mystical breeze⁠—and it might be, you never can tell⁠—I’d deduct five francs. Not but what it mightn’t fetch just as much in the American market. But how they bore me, those accomplished Gothicisms, how they bore me!”</p>
			<p>They were at the top of the hill. Emerging from the sloping forest of olive trees, the road now ran along a bare and almost level ridge. Some little way off, where the ground began to rise once more towards further heights, one could see a cluster of houses and a church tower. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan pointed.</p>
			<p>“There,” he said, “we shall find out what the butcher’s boy really did mean. But in the meantime it’s amusing to go on speculating. For example, suppose it were a chunk of a bas-relief designed by Giotto. Eh? Something so grand, so spiritually and materially beautiful that you could fall down and worship it. But I’d be very well pleased, I assure you, with a bit of a sarcophagus from the earliest renaissance. Some figure marvellously bright, ethereal and pure, like an angel, but an angel, not of the kingdom of heaven; an angel of some splendid and, alas, imaginary kingdom of earth. Ah,” pursued <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan, shaking his head, “that’s the kingdom one would like to live in⁠—the kingdom of ancient Greece, purged of every historical Greek that ever existed, and colonized out of the imaginations of modern artists, scholars and philosophers. In such a world one might live positively, so to speak⁠—live with the stream, in the direction of the main current⁠—not negatively, as one has to now, in reaction against the general trend of existence.”</p>
			<p>Positive and negative living. Miss Thriplow made a mental note of the notions. It might be an idea to work up in an article. It might even throw light on her own problems. Perhaps what one suffered from was the sense of being negative and in reaction. More positiveness⁠—that was what one needed. The conversation, she thought, seemed to be growing more serious. They walked on for a moment in silence. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan broke it at last.</p>
			<p>“Or can it possibly be,” he said, “that the grocer’s brother has lighted on some fragmentary rough-hewing by Michelangelo, begun in a frenzy while he was living among these mountains and abandoned when he left them? Some tormented Slave, struggling to free himself more of his inward than his outward chains; straining with more than human violence, but at the same time pensively, with a passion concentrated upon itself instead of explosively dissipated, as in the baroque, which all too fatally and easily developed out of him? And after all our hopes and speculations, that’s what my treasure will probably resolve itself into⁠—a bit of seventeenth-century baroque. I picture the torso of a waltzing angel in the middle of a whirlwind of draperies turning up to heaven the ecstatic eye of the clergyman in a Lyceum melodrama; or perhaps a Bacchus, dancing by a miracle of virtuosity on one marble leg, his mouth open in a tipsy laugh and the fingers of both hands splayed out to their fullest extent, just to show what can be done by a sculptor who knows his business; or the bust of a prince, prodigiously alive and characteristic, wearing a collar of Brussels lace imitated in stone down to the finest thread. The butcher’s boy kept on insisting that the thing was very beautiful as well as very old. And it’s obvious, now I come to think of it, that he’d really and sincerely like baroque and baroque only, just because it would be so familiar to him, because it would be just like everything he had been brought up to admire. For by some strange and malignant fate the Italians, once arrived at baroque, seem to have got stuck there. They are still up to the eyes in it. Consider their literature, their modern painting and architecture, their music⁠—it’s all baroque. It gesticulates rhetorically, it struts across stages, it sobs and bawls in its efforts to show you how passionate it is. In the midst, like a huge great Jesuit church, stands d’Annunzio.”</p>
			<p>“I should have thought,” said Miss Thriplow with barbed ingenuousness, “that you’d have liked that sort of elaboration and virtuosity. It’s ‘amusing’⁠—isn’t that the word?”</p>
			<p>“True,” answered <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan, “I like being amused. But I demand from my art the added luxury of being moved. And, somehow, one can’t feel emotion about anything so furiously and consciously emotional as these baroque things. It’s not by making wild and passionate gestures that an artist can awake emotion in the spectator. It isn’t done that way. These seventeenth-century Italians tried to express passion by making use of passionate gestures. They only succeeded in producing something that either leaves us cold⁠—though it may, as you say, amuse us⁠—or which actually makes us laugh. Art which is to move its contemplator must itself be still; it is almost an aesthetic law. Passion must never be allowed to dissipate itself in wild splashings and boilings over. It must be shut up, so to speak, and compressed and moulded by the intellect. Concentrated within a calm, untroubled form, its strength will irresistibly move. Styles that protest too much are not fit for serious, tragical use. They are by nature suited to comedy, whose essence is exaggeration. That is why good romantic art is so rare. Romanticism, of which the seventeenth-century baroque style is a queer subspecies, makes violent gestures; it relies on violent contrasts of light and shade, on stage effects; it is ambitious to present you with emotion in the raw and palpitating form. That is to say, the romantic style is in essence a comic style. And, except in the hands of a few colossal geniuses, romantic art is, in point of historical fact, almost always comic. Think of all the hair-raising romances written during the later eighteenth and earlier nineteenth centuries; now that the novelty has worn off them, we perceive them for what they are⁠—the broadest comedies. Even writers of a great and genuine talent were betrayed by the essentially comic nature of the style into being farcical when they meant to be romantically tragical. Balzac, for example, in a hundred serious passages; George Sand in all her earlier novels; Beddoes, when he tries to make his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Death’s Jest Book</i> particularly bloodcurdling; Byron in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Cain</i>; de Musset in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Rolla</i>. And what prevents Herman Melville’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Moby Dick</i> from being a really great book is precisely the pseudo-Shakespearean idiom in which what are meant to be the most tragical passages are couched⁠—an idiom to whose essential suitability to comedy the exceptional tragic successes of Shakespeare himself, of Marlowe and a few others has unfortunately blinded all their imitators. Moreover, if the romantic style is essentially fitted to comedy, it is also true, conversely, that the greatest comic works have been written in a romantic style. <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Pantagruel</i> and the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Contes Drolatiques</i>; the conversation of Falstaff and Wilkins Micawber; Aristophanes’ <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Frogs</i>; <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tristram Shandy</i>. And who will deny that the finest passages in Milton’s reverberating prose are precisely those where he is writing satirically and comically? A comic writer is a very large and copious man with a zest for all that is earthy, who unbuttons himself and lets himself freely go, following wherever his indefatigably romping spirit leads him. The unrestrained, exaggerated, wildly gesticulating manner which is the romantic manner exactly fulfils his need.”</p>
			<p>Miss Thriplow listened with growing attention. This was serious; moreover, it seemed really to touch her own problems. In her new novel she had done her best to throw off the light satiric vestments in which, in the past, she had clothed her tendernesses; this time, she had decided to give the public her naked heart. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan was making her wonder whether she wasn’t exposing it in too palpitating a manner.</p>
			<p>“When you come to pictorial art,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan went on, “you find that seriousness and romanticism are even less frequently combined than in literature. The greatest triumphs of the nineteenth-century romantic style are to be found precisely among the comedians and the makers of grotesques. Daumier, for example, produced at once the most comic and the most violently romantic pictures ever made. And Doré, when he ceased from trying to paint serious pictures in the romantic style⁠—with what involuntarily ludicrous results I leave you to recall to mind⁠—and applied himself to illustrating <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Don Quixote</i> and the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Contes Drolatiques</i> in the same romantic terms, Doré produced masterpieces. Indeed, the case of Doré quite clinches my argument. Here was a man who did precisely the same romantic things in both his serious and his comic works, and who succeeded in making what was meant to be sublime ludicrous and what was meant to be ludicrous sublime in its rich, extravagant, romantic grotesqueness.”</p>
			<p>They had passed the outlying houses of the village and were walking slowly up its single, steep street.</p>
			<p>“That’s very true,” said Miss Thriplow pensively. She was wondering whether she oughtn’t to tone down a little that description in her new novel of the agonies of the young wife when she discovers that her husband had been unfaithful to her. A dramatic moment, that. The young wife has just had her first baby⁠—with infinite suffering⁠—and now, still very frail, but infinitely happy, lies convalescent. The handsome young husband, whom she adores and who, she supposes, adores her, comes in with the afternoon post. He sits down by her bed, and putting the bunch of letters on the counterpane begins opening his correspondence. She opens hers too. Two boring notes. She tosses them aside. Without looking at the address, she opens another envelope, unfolds the sheet within and reads: “Doodlums darling, I shall be waiting for you tomorrow evening in our love-nest.⁠ ⁠…” She looks at the envelope; it is addressed to her husband. Her feelings⁠ ⁠… Miss Thriplow wondered; yes, perhaps, in the light of what <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan had been saying, the passage was a little too palpitating. Particularly that bit where the baby is brought in to be suckled. Miss Thriplow sighed; she’d read through the chapter critically when she got home.</p>
			<p>“Well,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan, interrupting the course of her thoughts, “here we are. It only remains to find out where the grocer lives, and to find out from the grocer where his brother lives, and to find out from the brother what his treasure is and how much he wants for it, and then to find someone to buy it for fifty thousand pounds⁠—and we’ll live happily ever after. What?”</p>
			<p>He stopped a passing child and put his question. The child pointed up the street. They walked on.</p>
			<p>At the door of his little shop sat the grocer, unoccupied at the moment, taking the sun and air and looking on at such stray drops from the flux of life as trickled occasionally along the village street. He was a stout man with a large fleshy face that looked as though it had been squeezed perpendicularly, so broadly it bulged, so close to one another the horizontal lines of eyes, nose and mouth. His cheeks and chin were black with five days’ beard⁠—for today was Thursday and shaving-time only came round on Saturday evening. Small, sly, black eyes looked out from between pouchy lids. He had thick lips, and his teeth when he smiled were yellow. A long white apron, unexpectedly clean, was tied at neck and waist and fell down over his knees. It was the apron that struck Miss Thriplow’s imagination⁠—the apron and the thought that this man wore it, draped round him like an ephod, when he was cutting up ham and sausages, when he was serving out sugar with a little shovel.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>“How extraordinarily nice and jolly he looks!” she said enthusiastically, as they approached.</p>
			<p>“Does he?” asked <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan in some surprise. To his eyes the man looked like a hardly mitigated ruffian.</p>
			<p>“So simple and happy and contented!” Miss Thriplow went on. “One envies them their lives.” She could almost have wept over the little shovel⁠—momentarily the masonic emblem of pre-lapsarian ingenuousness. “We make everything so unnecessarily complicated for ourselves, don’t we?”</p>
			<p>“Do we?” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan.</p>
			<p>“These people have no doubts, or afterthoughts,” pursued Miss Thriplow, “or⁠—what’s worse than afterthoughts⁠—simultaneous-thoughts. They know what they want and what’s right; they feel just what they ought to feel by nature⁠—like the heroes in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Iliad</i>⁠—and act accordingly. And the result is, I believe, that they’re much better than we are, much gooder, we used to say when we were children; the word’s more expressive. Yes, much gooder. Now you’re laughing at me!”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan twinkled at her with benevolent irony. “I assure you I’m not,” he declared.</p>
			<p>“But I shouldn’t mind if you were,” said Miss Thriplow. “For after all, in spite of all that you people may say or think, it’s the only thing that matters⁠—being good.”</p>
			<p>“I entirely agree,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan.</p>
			<p>“And it’s easier if you’re like that.” She nodded in the direction of the white apron.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan nodded, a little dubiously.</p>
			<p>“Sometimes,” Miss Thriplow continued, with a gush of confidence that made her words come more rapidly, “sometimes, when I get on a bus and take my ticket from the conductor, I suddenly feel the tears come into my eyes at the thought of this life, so simple and straightforward, so easy to live well, even if it is a hard one⁠—and perhaps, too, just because it is a hard one. Ours is so difficult.” She shook her head.</p>
			<p>By this time they were within a few yards of the shopkeeper, who, seeing that they were proposing to enter his shop, rose from his seat at the door and darted in to take up his stand, professionally, behind the counter.</p>
			<p>They followed him into the shop. It was dark within and filled with a violent smell of goat’s milk cheese, pickled tunny, tomato preserve and highly flavoured sausage.</p>
			<p>“Whee-ew!” said Miss Thriplow, and pulling out a small handkerchief, she took refuge with the ghost of Parma violets. It was a pity that these simple lives in white aprons had to be passed amid such surroundings.</p>
			<p>“Rather deafening, eh?” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan, twinkling. “<i xml:lang="it">Puzza</i>,” he added, turning to the shopkeeper. “It stinks.”</p>
			<p>The man looked at Miss Thriplow, who stood there, her nose in the oasis of her handkerchief, and smiled indulgently. “<i xml:lang="it">I forestieri sono troppo delicati. Troppo delicati</i>,” he repeated.</p>
			<p>“He’s quite right,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan. “We are. In the end, I believe, we shall come to sacrifice everything to comfort and cleanliness. Personally, I always have the greatest suspicion of your perfectly hygienic and well-padded Utopias. As for this particular stink,” he sniffed the air, positively with relish, “I don’t really know what you have to object to it. It’s wholesome, it’s natural, it’s tremendously historical. The shops of the Etruscan grocers, you may be sure, smelt just as this does. No, on the whole, I entirely agree with our friend here.”</p>
			<p>“Still,” said Miss Thriplow, speaking in a muffled voice through the folds of her handkerchief, “I shall stick to my violets. However synthetic.”</p>
			<p>Having ordered a couple of glasses of wine, one of which he offered to the grocer, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan embarked on a diplomatic conversation about the object of his visit. At the mention of his brother and the sculpture, the grocer’s face took on an expression of altogether excessive amiability. He bent his thick lips into smiles; deep folds in the shape of arcs of circles appeared in his fat cheeks. He kept bowing again and again. Every now and then he joyously laughed, emitting a blast of garlicky breath that smelt so powerfully like acetylene that one was tempted to put a match to his mouth in the hope that he would immediately break out into a bright white flame. He confirmed all that the butcher’s boy had said. It was all quite true; he had a brother; and his brother had a piece of marble statuary that was beautiful and old, old, old. Unfortunately, however, his brother had removed from this village and had gone down to live in the plain, near the lake of Massaciuccoli, and the sculpture had gone with him. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan tried to find out from him what the work of art looked like; but he could gather nothing beyond the fact that it was beautiful and old and represented a man.</p>
			<p>“It isn’t like this, I suppose?” asked <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan, bending himself into the attitude of a Romanesque demon and making a demoniac grimace.</p>
			<p>The grocer thought not. Two peasant women who had come in for cheese and oil looked on with a mild astonishment. These foreigners⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>“Or like this?” He propped his elbow on the counter and, half reclining, conjured up, by his attitude and his fixed smile of imbecile ecstasy, visions of Etruscan revelry.</p>
			<p>Again the grocer shook his head.</p>
			<p>“Or like this?” He rolled his eyes towards heaven, like a baroque saint.</p>
			<p>But the grocer seemed doubtful even of this.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan wiped his forehead. “If I could make myself look like a Roman bust,” he said to Miss Thriplow, “or a bas-relief of Giotto, or a renaissance sarcophagus, or an unfinished group by Michelangelo, I would. But it’s beyond my powers.” He shook his head. “For the moment I give it up.”</p>
			<p>He took out his pocketbook and asked for the brother’s address. The grocer gave directions; <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan carefully took them down. Smiling and bowing, the grocer ushered them out into the street, Miss Thriplow vailed her handkerchief and drew a breath of air⁠—redolent, however, even here, of organic chemistry.</p>
			<p>“Patience,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan, “tenacity of purpose. One needs them here.”</p>
			<p>They walked slowly down the street. They had only gone a few yards when the noise of a violent altercation made them turn round. At the door of the shop the grocer and his two customers were furiously disputing. Voices were raised, the grocer’s deep and harsh, the women’s shrill; hands moved in violent and menacing gestures, yet gracefully withal, as was natural in the hands of those whose ancestors had taught the old masters of painting all they ever knew of expressive and harmonious movement.</p>
			<p>“What is it?” asked Miss Thriplow. “It looks like the preliminaries of a murder.”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan smiled and shrugged his shoulders. “It’s nothing,” he said. “They’re just calling him a robber; that’s all.” He listened for a moment more to the shouting. “A little question of short weight, it seems.” He smiled at Miss Thriplow. “Should we go on?”</p>
			<p>They turned away; the sound of the dispute followed them down the street. Miss Thriplow did not know whether to be grateful to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan for saying nothing more about her friend in the white apron. These simple folk⁠ ⁠… the little shovel for the sugar⁠ ⁠… so much better, so much <em>gooder</em> than we.⁠ ⁠… In the end she almost wished that he would say something about it. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan’s silence seemed more ironic than any words.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
