<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>II</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-2" id="chapter-2-2" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</h3>
			<p>Gog’s Court, the navel of reality! Repeating those verses of mine in the silence, I intimately felt the truth of it.</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>For if of old the sons of squires</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And livery stable keepers turned</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To flowers and hope, to Greece and God,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We in our later age have learned</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That we are native where we walk.</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>My voice boomed out oracularly across the flat sea. Nothing so richly increases the significance of a statement as to hear it uttered by one’s own voice, in solitude. “Resolved, so help me God, never to touch another drop!” Those solemn words, breathed out in a mist of whiskey⁠—how often, in dark nights, on icy mornings, how often have they been uttered! And the portentous imprecation seems to engage the whole universe to do battle on behalf of the Better Self against its besetting vice. Thrilling and awful moment! Merely for the sake of living through it again, for the sake of once more breaking the empty silence with the reverberating Stygian oath, it is well worth neglecting the good resolution. I say nothing of the pleasures of inebriation.</p>
			<p>My own brief recital served to confirm for me the truth of my speculations. For not only was I uttering the substance of my thoughts aloud; I was voicing it in terms of a formula that had an element, I flatter myself, of magic about it. What is the secret of these verbal felicities? How does it come about that a commonplace thought embodied by a poet in some abracadabrical form seems bottomlessly profound, while a positively false and stupid notion may be made by its expression to seem true? Frankly, I don’t know. And what is more, I have never found anyone who could give an answer to the riddle. What is it that makes the two words “defunctive music” as moving as the dead march out of the <i epub:type="se:name.music">Eroica</i> and the close of <i epub:type="se:name.music">Coriolan</i>? Why should it be somehow more profoundly comic to “call Tullia’s ape a marmosite” than to write a whole play of Congreve? And the line, “Thoughts that do often lie too deep for tears”⁠—why should it in effect lie where it does? Mystery. This game of art strangely resembles conjuring. The quickness of the tongue deceives the brain. It has happened, after all, often enough. Old Shakespeare, for example. How many critical brains have been deceived by the quickness of <em>his</em> tongue! Because he can say “Shoughs, water-rugs and demi-wolves,” and “defunctive music,” and “the expense of spirit in a waste of shame” and all the rest of it, we credit him with philosophy, a moral purpose and the most penetrating psychology. Whereas his thoughts are incredibly confused, his only purpose is to entertain and he has created only three characters. One, Cleopatra, is an excellent copy from the life, like a character out of a good realistic novel, say one of Tolstoy’s. The other two⁠—Macbeth and Falstaff⁠—are fabulous imaginary figures, consistent with themselves but not real in the sense that Cleopatra is real. My poor friend Calamy would call them more real, would say that they belong to the realm of Absolute Art. And so forth. I cannot go into poor Calamy’s opinions, at any rate in this context; later on, perhaps. For me, in any case, Macbeth and Falstaff are perfectly genuine and complete mythological characters, like Jupiter or Gargantua, Medea or <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Winkle. They are the only two well-invented mythological monsters in the whole of Shakespeare’s collection; just as Cleopatra is the only well-copied reality. His boundless capacity for abracadabra has deceived innumerable people into imagining that all the other characters are as good.</p>
			<p>But the Bard, heaven help me, is not my theme. Let me return to my recitation on the face of the waters. As I have said, my conviction “that we are native where we walk” was decidedly strengthened by the sound of my own voice pronouncing the elegant formula in which the notion was embalmed. Repeating the words, I thought of Gog’s Court, of my little room with the reflector at the window, of the light that burns in winter even at noon, of the smell of printer’s ink and the noise of the presses. I was back there, out of this irrelevant poem of a sunshiny landscape, back in the palpitating heart of things. On the table before me lay a sheaf of long galleys; it was Wednesday; I should have been correcting proofs, but I was idle that afternoon! On the blank six inches at the bottom of a galley I had been writing those lines: “For if of old the sons of squires⁠ ⁠…” Pensively, a halma player contemplating his next move, I hung over them. What were the possible improvements? There was a knock at the door. I drew a sheet of blotting paper across the bottom of the galley⁠—“Come in”⁠—and went on with my interrupted reading of the print. “… Since Himalayas were made to breed true to colour, no event has aroused greater enthusiasm in the fancier’s world than the fixation of the new Flemish-Angora type. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Spargle’s achievement is indeed a nepoch-making one.⁠ ⁠…” I restored the <i epub:type="z3998:grapheme">n</i> of nepoch to its widowed <i epub:type="z3998:grapheme">a</i>, and looked up. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Bosk, the subeditor, was standing over me.</p>
			<p>“Proof of the leader, sir,” he said, bowing with that exquisitely contemptuous politeness which characterized all his dealings with me, and handed me another galley.</p>
			<p>“Thank you, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Bosk,” I said.</p>
			<p>But <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Bosk did not retire. Standing there in his favourite and habitual attitude, the attitude assumed by our ancestors (of whom, indeed, old <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Bosk was one) in front of the half-draped marble column of the photographer’s studio, he looked at me, faintly smiling through his thin white beard. The third button of his waistcoat was undone and his right hand, like a half-posted letter, was inserted in the orifice. He rested his weight on a rigid right leg. The other leg was slightly bent, and the heel of one touching the toe of the other, his left foot made with his right a perfect right angle. I could see that I was in for a reproof.</p>
			<p>“What is it, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Bosk?” I asked.</p>
			<p>Among the sparse hairs <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Bosk’s smile became piercingly sweet. He put his head archly on one side. His voice when he spoke was mellifluous. On these occasions when I was to be dressed down and put in my place his courtesy degenerated into a kind of affected girlish coquetry. “If you don’t mind my saying so, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Chelifer,” he said mincingly, “I think you’ll find that <i xml:lang="es">rabear</i> in Spanish does not mean ‘to wag the tail,’ as you say in your leader on the derivation of the word ‘rabbit,’ so much as ‘to wag the hind quarters.’ ”</p>
			<p>“Wag the hind quarters, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Bosk?” I said. “But that sounds to me a very difficult feat.”</p>
			<p>“Not in Spain, apparently,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Bosk, almost giggling.</p>
			<p>“But this is England, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Bosk.”</p>
			<p>“Nevertheless, my authority is no less than Skeat himself.” And triumphantly, with the air of one who, at a critical moment of the game, produces a fifth ace, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Bosk brought forward his left hand, which he had been keeping mysteriously behind his back. It held a dictionary; a strip of paper marked the page. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Bosk laid it, opened, on the table before me; with a thick nail he pointed. “ ‘… or possibly,’ ” I read aloud, “ ‘from Spanish <i xml:lang="es">rabear</i>, to wag the hind quarters.’ Right as usual, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Bosk. I’ll alter it in the proof.”</p>
			<p>“Thank you, sir,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Bosk with a mock humility. Inwardly he was exulting in his triumph. He picked up his dictionary, repeated his contemptuously courteous bow and walked with a gliding noiseless motion towards the door. On the threshold he paused. “I remember that the question arose once before, sir,” he said; his voice was poisonously honeyed. “In <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Parfitt’s time,” and he slipped out, closing the door quietly behind him.</p>
			<p>It was a Parthian shot. The name of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Parfitt was meant to wound me to the quick, to bring the blush of shame to my cheek. For had not <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Parfitt been the perfect, complete and infallible editor? Whereas I⁠ ⁠… <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Bosk left it to my own conscience to decide what I was.</p>
			<p>And indeed I was well aware of my shortcomings. <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">The Rabbit Fanciers’ Gazette</i>, with which, as every schoolboy knows, is incorporated <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">The Mouse Breeders’ Record</i>, could hardly have had a more unsuitable editor than I. To this day, I confess, I hardly know the right end of a rabbit from the wrong. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Bosk was a survivor from the grand old days of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Parfitt, the founder and for thirty years the editor of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Gazette</i>.</p>
			<p>“<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Parfitt, sir,” he used to tell me every now and then, “was a <em>real</em> fancier.” His successor, by implication, was not.</p>
			<p>It was at the end of the war. I was looking for a job⁠—a job at the heart of reality. The illusory nature of the position had made me decline my old college’s offer of a fellowship. I wanted something⁠—how shall I put it?⁠—more palpitating. And then in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">The Times</i> I found what I had been looking for. “Wanted Editor of proved literary ability for livestock trade paper. Apply Box 92.” I applied, was interviewed, and conquered. The directors couldn’t finally resist my testimonial from the Bishop of Bosham. “A lifelong acquaintance with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Chelifer and his family permits me confidently to assert that he is a young man of great ability and high moral purpose, (signed) Hartley Bosh.” I was appointed for a probationary period of six months.</p>
			<p>Old <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Parfitt, the retiring editor, stayed on a few days at the office to initiate me into the secrets of the work. He was a benevolent old gentleman, short, thick and with a very large head. His square face was made to seem even broader than it was by the grey whiskers which ran down his cheeks to merge imperceptibly into the ends of his moustache. He knew more about mice and rabbits than any man in the country; but what he prided himself on was his literary gift. He explained to me the principles on which he wrote his weekly leaders.</p>
			<p>“In the fable,” he told me, smiling already in anticipation of the end of this joke which he had been elaborating and polishing since 1892, “in the fable it is the mountain which, after a long and, if I may say so, geological labour, gives birth to the mouse. My principle, on the contrary, has always been, wherever possible, to make my mice parturate mountains.” He paused expectantly. When I had laughed, he went on. “It’s astonishing what reflections on life and art and politics and philosophy and whatnot you can get out of a mouse or a rabbit. Quite astonishing!”</p>
			<p>The most notable of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Parfitt’s mountain thoughts still hangs, under glass and in an Oxford frame, on the wall above the editorial desk. It was printed in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Rabbit Fancier</i> for August 8, 1914.</p>
			<p>“It is not the readers of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Rabbit Fanciers’ Gazette</i>,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Parfitt had written on that cardinal date, “who have made this war. No Mouse Breeder, I emphatically proclaim, has desired it. No! Absorbed in their harmless and indeed beneficent occupations, they have had neither the wish nor the leisure to disturb the world’s peace. If all men wholeheartedly devoted themselves to avocations like ours, there would be no war. The world would be filled with the innocent creators and fosterers of life, not, as at present, with its tigerish destroyers. Had Kaiser William the Second been a breeder of rabbits or mice, we should not find ourselves today in a world whose very existence is threatened by the unimaginable horrors of modern warfare.”</p>
			<p>Noble words! <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Parfitt’s righteous indignation was strengthened by his fears for the future of his paper. The war, he gloomily foreboded, would mean the end of rabbit breeding. But he was wrong. Mice, it is true, went rather out of fashion between 1914 and 1918. But in the lean years of rationing, rabbits took on a new importance. In 1917 there were ten fanciers of Flemish Giants to everyone there had been before the war. Subscriptions rose, advertisements were multiplied.</p>
			<p>“Rabbits,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Parfitt assured me, “did a great deal to help us win the war.”</p>
			<p>And conversely, the war did so much to help rabbits that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Parfitt was able to retire in 1919 with a modest but adequate fortune. It was then that I took over control. And in spite of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Bosk’s contempt for my ignorance and incompetence, I must in justice congratulate myself on the way in which I piloted the concern through the evil times which followed. Peace found the English people at once less prosperous and less hungry than they had been during the war. The time had passed when it was necessary for them to breed rabbits; and they could not afford the luxury of breeding them for pleasure. Subscriptions declined, advertisements fell off. I averted an impending catastrophe by adding to the paper a new section dealing with goats. Biologically, no doubt, as I pointed out to the directors in my communication on the subject, this mingling of ruminants with rodents was decidedly unsound. But commercially, I felt sure, the innovation would be justified. It was. The goats brought half a dozen pages of advertisements in their train and several hundred new subscribers. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Bosk was furious at my success; but the directors thought very highly of my capacities.</p>
			<p>They did not, it is true, always approve of my leading articles. “Couldn’t you try to make them a little more popular,” suggested the managing director, “a little more practical too, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Chelifer? For instance,” and clearing his throat, he unfolded the typewritten sheet of complaints which he had had prepared and had brought with him to the board meeting, “for instance, what’s the practical value of this stuff about the use of the word ‘cony’ as a term of endearment in the Elizabethan dramatists? And this article on the derivation of ‘rabbit’ ”⁠—he looked at his paper again and coughed. “Who wants to know that there’s a Walloon word <i xml:lang="wa">robett</i>? Or that our word may have something to do with the Spanish <i xml:lang="it">rabear</i>, to wag the hind quarters? And who, by the way,” he added, looking up at me over his pince-nez with an air⁠—prematurely put on⁠—of triumph, “who ever heard of an animal wagging its hind quarters?”</p>
			<p>“Nevertheless,” I said, apologetically, but firmly, as befits a man who knows that he is right, “my authority is no less than Skeat himself.”</p>
			<p>The managing director, who had hoped to score a point, went on, defeated, to the next count in the indictment. “And then, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Chelifer,” he said, “we don’t very much like, my fellow directors and I, we don’t much like what you say in your article on ‘Rabbit Fancying and its Lesson to Humanity.’ It may be true that breeders have succeeded in producing domesticated rabbits that are four times the weight of wild rabbits and possess only half the quantity of brains⁠—it may be true. Indeed, it is true. And a very remarkable achievement it is, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Chelifer, very remarkable indeed. But that is no reason for upholding, as you do, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Chelifer, that the ideal working man, at whose production the eugenist should aim, is a man eight times as strong as the present-day workman, with only a sixteenth of his mental capacity. Not that my fellow directors and I entirely disagree with what you say, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Chelifer; far from it. All right-thinking men must agree that the modern workman is too well educated. But we have to remember, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Chelifer, that many of our readers actually belong to that class.”</p>
			<p>“Quite.” I acquiesced in the reproof.</p>
			<p>“And finally, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Chelifer, there is your article on the ‘Symbology of the Goat.’ We feel that the facts you have there collected, however interesting to the anthropologist and the student of folklore, are hardly of a kind to be set before a mixed public like ours.”</p>
			<p>The other directors murmured their assent. There was a prolonged silence.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
