<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>IX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-3" id="chapter-3-9" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX</h3>
			<p>Early the next morning <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan and his hostess left the house and walked rapidly away through the fields in the direction of the lake. They had told the old woman that they would be back to a late breakfast. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Elver was not yet awake; <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan had left instructions that he was not to be called before half-past nine.</p>
			<p>The ground was still wet with dew when they set out; the poplar trees threw shadows longer than themselves. The air was cool; it was a pleasure to walk. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan strode along at four miles an hour; and like a diver out of water, like a soaring bird reduced to walk the earth, Miss Elver trotted along at his side, rolling and hopping as she walked, as though she were mounted, not on feet, but on a set of eccentric wheels of different diameters. Her face seemed to shine with happiness; every now and then she looked at <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan with shy adoration, and if she happened to catch his eye she would blush, turn away her head and laugh. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan was almost appalled by the extent of his success and the ease with which it had been obtained. He might make a slave of the poor creature, might keep her shut up in a rabbit-hutch, and, provided he showed himself now and again to be worshipped, she would be perfectly happy. The thought made <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan feel strangely guilty.</p>
			<p>“When we’re married,” said Miss Elver suddenly, “shall we have some children?”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan smiled rather grimly. “The trouble about children,” he said, “is that the bears might eat them. You can never be quite sure of bears. Remember Elisha’s bears and those bad children.”</p>
			<p>Miss Elver’s face became thoughtful. She walked on for a long time in silence.</p>
			<p>They came to the lake, lying placid and very bright under the pale early-morning sky. At the sight of it Miss Elver clapped her hands with pleasure; she forgot in an instant all her troubles. The fatal incompatibility between bears and children ceased to preoccupy her. “What lovely water!” she cried, and bending down she picked up a pebble from the path and threw it into the lake.</p>
			<p>But <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan did not permit her to linger. “There’s no time to lose,” he said, and taking her arm he hurried her on.</p>
			<p>“Where are we going to?” asked Miss Elver.</p>
			<p>He pointed to the village on the further shore of the lake. “From there,” he said, “we’ll take some sort of cab or cart.”</p>
			<p>The prospect of driving in a cart entirely reconciled Miss Elver to parting at such short notice with the lake. “That’ll be lovely,” she declared, and trotted on so fast that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan had to quicken his pace in order to keep up with her.</p>
			<p>While the little carriage was being made ready and the horse put in and harnessed⁠—hastelessly, as these things are always done in Italy, with dignity and at leisure⁠—<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan went to visit the grocer’s brother. Now that he had come so far it would be foolish to miss the opportunity of seeing the treasure. The grocer’s brother was himself a grocer, and so like his relative that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan could almost fancy it was Miss Thriplow’s virtuous and simple friend from the hilltop to whom he was now speaking in the plain. When <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan explained his business the man bowed, wreathed himself in smiles, laughed and blew acetylene into his face just as his brother had done. He expatiated on the beauty and the antiquity of his treasure, and when <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan begged him to make haste and show him the sculpture, he would not suffer himself to be interrupted, but went on lyrically with his description, repeating the same phrases again and again and gesticulating until he began to sweat. At last, when he considered <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan worked up to a due state of preliminary enthusiasm, the grocer opened the door at the back of the shop and mysteriously beckoned to his visitor to follow him. They walked down a dark passage, through a kitchen full of tumbling children on whom one had to be careful not to tread, across a little yard and into a mouldering outhouse. The grocer led the way, walking all the time on tiptoe and speaking only in a whisper⁠—for what reason <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan could not imagine, unless it was to impress him with the profound importance of the affair, and perhaps to suggest that the beauty and antiquity of the work of art were such that it was only barefoot and in silence that it should be approached.</p>
			<p>“Wait there,” he whispered impressively, as they entered the outhouse.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan waited. The grocer tiptoed across to the further corner of the shed. Mysteriously draped in sacking, something that might have been an ambushed man stood motionless in the shadow. The grocer halted in front of it and, standing a little to one side so as to give <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan an uninterrupted view of the marvel to be revealed, took hold of a corner of the sacking, and with a magnificently dramatic gesture whisked it off.</p>
			<p>There emerged the marble effigy of what in the imagination of a monumental mason of 1830 figured as a Poet. A slenderer Byron with yet more hyacinthine hair and a profile borrowed from one of Canova’s Greeks, he stood, leaning against a truncated column, his marble eyes turned upwards in pursuit of the flying Muse. A cloak hung lankly from his shoulders; a vine leaf was all the rest of his costume. On the top of the truncated column lay a half-opened marble scroll, which the Poet’s left hand held down for fear it should be blown clean away by the wind of inspiration. His right, it was evident, had originally poised above the virgin page a stylus. But the hand, alas, and the whole forearm almost to the elbow were gone. At the base of the column was a little square tablet on which, if the figure had ever been put to its proper monumental use, should have been written the name and claims to fame of the poet upon whose tomb it was to stand. But the tablet was blank. At the time this statue was carved there had evidently been a dearth of lyrists in the principality of Massa Carrara.</p>
			<p>“<i xml:lang="it">E bellissimo!</i>” said the grocer’s brother, standing back and looking at it with a connoisseur’s enthusiasm.</p>
			<p>“<i xml:lang="it">Davvero</i>,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan agreed. He thought sadly of his recumbent Etruscan, his sarcophagus by Jacopo della Quercia, his Romanesque demon. Still, he reflected, even a bas-relief by Giotto would hardly have brought him five-and-twenty thousand pounds.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
