<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>VII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-1" id="chapter-1-7" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">VII</h3>
			<p>To say good night definitely and for the last time was a thing which <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝAldwinkle found most horribly difficult. With those two fatal words she pronounced sentence of death on yet another day (on yet another, and the days were so few now, so agonizingly brief); she pronounced it also, temporarily at least, on herself. For, the formula once finally uttered, there was nothing for her to do but creep away out of the light and bury herself in the black unconsciousness of sleep. Six hours, eight hours would be stolen from her and never given back. And what marvellous things might not be happening while she was lying dead between the sheets! Extraordinary happinesses might present themselves and, finding her asleep and deaf to their calling, pass on. Or someone, perhaps, would be saying the one supremely important, revealing, apocalyptic thing that she had been waiting all her life to hear. ‚ÄúThere!‚Äù she could imagine somebody winding up, ‚Äúthat‚Äôs the secret of the Universe. What a pity poor Lilian should have gone to bed. She would have loved to hear it.‚Äù Good night‚ÅÝ‚Äîit was like parting with a shy lover who had not yet ventured to declare himself. A minute more and he would speak, would reveal himself the unique soul-mate. Good night, and he would remain forever merely diffident little <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝJones. Must she part with this day too, before it was transfigured?</p>
			<p>Good night. Every evening she put off the saying of it as long as she possibly could. It was generally half-past one or two before she could bring herself to leave the drawing-room. And even then the words were not finally spoken. For on the threshold of her bedchamber she would halt, desperately renewing the conversation with whichever of her guests had happened to light her upstairs. Who knew? Perhaps in these last five minutes, in the intimacy, in the nocturnal silence, the important thing really would be said. The five minutes often lengthened themselves out to forty, and still <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝAldwinkle stood there, desperately putting off and putting off the moment when she would have to pronounce the sentence of death.</p>
			<p>When there was nobody else to talk to, she had to be content with the company of Irene, who always, when she herself had undressed, came back in her dressing-gown to help <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝAldwinkle‚ÅÝ‚Äîsince it would have been unfair to keep a maid up to such late hours‚ÅÝ‚Äîmake ready for the night. Not that little Irene was particularly likely to utter the significant word or think the one apocalyptic thought. Though of course one never knew: out of the mouths of babes and sucklings‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ And in any case, talking with Irene, who was a dear child and so devoted, was better than definitely condemning oneself to bed.</p>
			<p>Tonight, it was one o‚Äôclock before <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝAldwinkle made a move towards the door. Miss Thriplow and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝFalx, protesting that they too were sleepy, accompanied her. And like an attendant shadow, Irene silently rose when her aunt rose and silently walked after her. Halfway across the room <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝAldwinkle halted and turned round. Formidable she was, a tragedy queen in coral-red velvet. Her little white muslin mirage halted too. Less patient, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝFalx and Miss Thriplow moved on towards the door.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYou must all come to bed soon, you know,‚Äù she said, addressing herself to the three men who remained at the further end of the room in a tone at once imperious and cajoling. ‚ÄúI simply won‚Äôt allow you, Cardan, to keep those poor young men out of their beds to all hours of the night. Poor Calamy has been travelling all day. And Hovenden needs all the sleep, at his age, that he can get.‚Äù <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝAldwinkle took it hardly that any of her guests should be awake and talking while she was lying dead in the tomb of sleep. ‚Äú<em>Poor</em> Calamy!‚Äù she pathetically exclaimed, as though it were a case of cruelty to animals. She felt herself filled, all at once, with an enormous and maternal solicitude for this young man.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYes, poor Calamy!‚Äù <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝCardan repeated, twinkling. ‚ÄúOut of pure sympathy I was suggesting that we should drink a pint or two of red wine before going to bed. There‚Äôs nothing like it for making one sleep.‚Äù</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝAldwinkle turned her bright blue eyes on Calamy, smiled her sweetest and most piercing smile. ‚ÄúDo come,‚Äù she said. ‚ÄúDo.‚Äù She extended her hand in a clumsy and inexpressive gesture. ‚ÄúAnd you, Hovenden,‚Äù she added, almost despairingly.</p>
			<p>Hovenden looked uncomfortably from <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝCardan to Calamy, hoping that one or other of them would answer for him.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWe shan‚Äôt be long,‚Äù said Calamy. ‚ÄúThe time to drink a glass of wine, that‚Äôs all. I‚Äôm not a bit tired, you know. And Cardan‚Äôs suggestion of Chianti is very tempting.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAh well,‚Äù said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝAldwinkle, ‚Äúif you prefer a glass of wine‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Äù She turned away with a sad indignation and rustled off towards the door, sweeping the tiled floor with the train of her velvet dress. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝFalx and Miss Thriplow, who had been lingering impatiently near the door, drew back in order that she might make her exit in full majesty. With a face that looked very gravely out of the little window in her bell of copper hair, Irene followed. The door closed behind them.</p>
			<p>Calamy turned to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝCardan. ‚ÄúIf I prefer a glass of wine?‚Äù he repeated on a note of interrogation. ‚ÄúBut prefer it to what? She made it sound as if I had had to make a momentous and eternal choice between her and a pint of Chianti‚ÅÝ‚Äîand had chosen the Chianti. It passes my understanding.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAh, but then you don‚Äôt know Lilian as well as I do,‚Äù said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝCardan. ‚ÄúAnd now, let‚Äôs go and hunt out that flask and some glasses in the dining-room.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Halfway up the stairs‚ÅÝ‚Äîthey were a grand and solemn flight loping gradually upwards under a slanting tunnel of barrel vaulting‚ÅÝ‚Äî<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝAldwinkle paused. ‚ÄúI always think of them,‚Äù she said ecstatically, ‚Äúgoing up, coming down. Such a spectacle!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWho?‚Äù asked <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝFalx.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThose grand old people.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOh, the tyrants.‚Äù</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝAldwinkle smiled pityingly. ‚ÄúAnd the poets, the scholars, the philosophers, the painters, the musicians, the beautiful women. You forget those, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝFalx.‚Äù She raised her hand, as though summoning their spirits from the abyss. Psychical eyes might have seen a jewelled prince with a nose like an anteater‚Äôs slowly descending between obsequious human hedges. Behind him a company of buffoons and little hunchbacked dwarfs, stepping cautiously, sidelong, from stair to stair.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI forget nothing,‚Äù said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝFalx. ‚ÄúBut I think tyrants are too high a price to pay.‚Äù</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝAldwinkle sighed and resumed her climbing. ‚ÄúWhat a queer fellow Calamy is, don‚Äôt you think?‚Äù she said, addressing herself to Miss Thriplow. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝAldwinkle, who liked discussing other people‚Äôs characters and who prided herself on her perspicacity and her psychological intuition, found almost everybody ‚Äúqueer,‚Äù even, when she thought it worth while discussing her, little Irene. She liked to think that everyone she knew was tremendously complicated; had strange and improbable motives for his simplest actions, was moved by huge, dark passions; cultivated secret vices; in a word, was larger than life and a good deal more interesting. ‚ÄúWhat did you think of him, Mary?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúVery intelligent,‚Äù thought Miss Thriplow.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOh, of course, of course,‚Äù <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝAldwinkle agreed almost impatiently; that wasn‚Äôt anything much to talk about. ‚ÄúBut one hears odd stories of his amorous tastes, you know.‚Äù The party halted at the door of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝAldwinkle‚Äôs room. ‚ÄúPerhaps that was one of the reasons,‚Äù she went on mysteriously, ‚Äúwhy he went travelling all that time‚ÅÝ‚Äîright away from civilization.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Äù On such a theme a conversation might surely be almost indefinitely protracted; the moment for uttering the final, fatal good night had not yet come.</p>
			<p>Downstairs in the great saloon the three men were sitting over their red wine. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝCardan had already twice refilled his glass. Calamy was within sight of the bottom of his first tumbler; young Lord Hovenden‚Äôs was still more than half full. He was not a very accomplished drinker and was afraid of being sick if he swallowed too much of this young and generous brew.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúBored, you‚Äôre just bored. That‚Äôs all it is,‚Äù <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝCardan was saying. He looked at Calamy over the top of his glass and took another sip, as though to his health. ‚ÄúYou haven‚Äôt met anyone of late who took your fancy; that‚Äôs all. Unless, of course, it‚Äôs a case of catarrh in the bile ducts.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIt‚Äôs neither,‚Äù said Calamy, smiling.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOr perhaps it‚Äôs the first great climacteric. You don‚Äôt happen to be thirty-five, I suppose? Five times seven‚ÅÝ‚Äîa most formidable age. Though not quite so serious as sixty-three. That‚Äôs the grand climacteric.‚Äù <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝCardan shook his head. ‚ÄúThank the Lord, I got past it without dying, or joining the Church of Rome, or getting married. Thank the Lord; but you?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI‚Äôm thirty-three,‚Äù said Calamy.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúA most harmless time of life. Then it‚Äôs just boredom. You‚Äôll meet some little ravishment and all the zest will return.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Young Lord Hovenden laughed in a very ventriloquial, man-of-the-worldly fashion.</p>
			<p>Calamy shook his head. ‚ÄúBut I don‚Äôt really want it to return,‚Äù he said. ‚ÄúI don‚Äôt want to succumb to any more little ravishments. It‚Äôs too stupid; it‚Äôs too childish. I used to think that there was something rather admirable and enviable about being an <i xml:lang="fr">homme √Ý bonnes fortunes</i>. Don Juan has an honoured place in literature; it‚Äôs thought only natural that a Casanova should complacently boast of his successes. I accepted the current view, and when I was lucky in love‚ÅÝ‚Äîand I‚Äôve always been only too deplorably fortunate‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI used to think the more highly of myself.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWe have all thought the same,‚Äù said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝCardan. ‚ÄúThe weakness is a pardonable one.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Lord Hovenden nodded and took a sip of wine to show that he entirely agreed with the last speaker.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúPardonable, no doubt,‚Äù said Calamy. ‚ÄúBut when one comes to think it over, not very reasonable. For, after all, there‚Äôs nothing really to be very proud of, there‚Äôs nothing very much to boast about. Consider first of all the other heroes who have had the same sort of successes‚ÅÝ‚Äîmore notable, very probably, and more numerous than one‚Äôs own. Consider them. What do you see? Rows of insolent grooms and pugilists; leather-faced ruffians and disgusting old satyrs; louts with curly hair and no brains, and cunning little pimps like weasels; soft-palmed young epicenes and hairy gladiators‚ÅÝ‚Äîa vast army composed of the most odious specimens of humanity. Is one to be proud of belonging to their numbers?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWhy not?‚Äù asked <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝCardan. ‚ÄúOne should always thank God for whatever native talents one possesses. If your talent happens to lie in the direction of higher mathematics, praise God; and if in the direction of seduction, praise God just the same. And thanking God, when one comes to examine the process a little closely, is very much the same as boasting or being proud. I see no harm in boasting a little of one‚Äôs Casanovesque capacities. You young men are always so damned intolerant. You won‚Äôt allow anyone to go to heaven, or hell, or nowhere, whichever the case may be, by any road except the one you happen to approve of.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ You should take a leaf out of the Indians‚Äô book. The Indians calculate that there are eighty-four thousand different types of human beings, each with its own way of getting through life. They probably underestimate.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Calamy laughed. ‚ÄúI only speak for my type,‚Äù he said.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAnd Hovenden and I for ours,‚Äù said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝCardan. ‚ÄúDon‚Äôt we, Hovenden?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOh yes. Yes, of course,‚Äù Lord Hovenden answered; and for some reason he blushed.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúProceed,‚Äù said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝCardan, refilling his glass.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWell then,‚Äù Calamy went on, ‚Äúbelonging to the species I do belong to, I can‚Äôt take much satisfaction in these successes. The more so when I consider their nature. For either you‚Äôre in love with the woman or you aren‚Äôt; either you‚Äôre carried away by your inflamed imagination (for, after all, the person you‚Äôre really violently in love with is always your own invention and the wildest of fancies) or by your senses and your intellectual curiosity. If you aren‚Äôt in love, it‚Äôs a mere experiment in applied physiology, with a few psychological investigations thrown in to make it a little more interesting. But if you are, it means that you become enslaved, involved, dependent on another human being in a way that‚Äôs positively disgraceful, and the more disgraceful the more there is in you to be enslaved and involved.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIt wasn‚Äôt Browning‚Äôs opinion,‚Äù said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝCardan.</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>‚ÄúThe woman yonder, there‚Äôs no use in life</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But just to obtain her.‚Äù</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>‚ÄúBrowning was a fool,‚Äù said Calamy.</p>
			<p>But Lord Hovenden was silently of opinion that Browning was quite right. He thought of Irene‚Äôs face, looking out of the little window in the copper bell.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúBrowning belonged to another species,‚Äù <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝCardan corrected.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúA foolish species, I insist,‚Äù said Calamy.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWell, to tell the truth,‚Äù <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝCardan admitted, closing his winking eye a little further, ‚ÄúI secretly agree with you about that. I‚Äôm not really as entirely tolerant as I should like to be.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Calamy was frowning pensively over his own affairs, and without discussing the greater or less degree of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝCardan‚Äôs tolerance he went on. ‚ÄúThe question is, at the end of it all: what‚Äôs the way out? what‚Äôs to be done about it? For it‚Äôs obvious, as you say, that the little ravishments will turn up again. And appetite grows with fasting. And philosophy, which knows very well how to deal with past and future temptations, always seems to break down before the present, the immediate ones.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúHappily,‚Äù said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝCardan. ‚ÄúFor, when all is said, is there a better indoor sport? Be frank with me; <em>is</em> there?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúPossibly not,‚Äù said Calamy, while young Lord Hovenden smiled at <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝCardan‚Äôs last remark, but unenthusiastically, in a rather painful indecision between amusement and horror. ‚ÄúBut the point is, aren‚Äôt there better occupations for a man of sense than indoor sports, even the best of indoor sports?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNo,‚Äù said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝCardan, with decision.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúFor you, perhaps, there mayn‚Äôt be. But it seems to me,‚Äù Calamy went on, ‚Äúthat I‚Äôm beginning to have had enough of sports, whether indoor or out-of-door. I‚Äôd like to find some more serious occupation.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúBut that‚Äôs easier said than done.‚Äù <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝCardan shook his head. ‚ÄúFor members of our species it‚Äôs precious hard to find any occupation that seems entirely serious. Eh?‚Äù</p>
			<p>Calamy laughed, rather mournfully. ‚ÄúThat‚Äôs true,‚Äù he said. ‚ÄúBut at the same time the sports begin to seem rather an outrage on one‚Äôs human dignity. Rather immoral, I would say, if the word weren‚Äôt so absurd.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNot at all absurd, I assure you, when used as you use it.‚Äù <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝCardan twinkled more and more genially over the top of his glass. ‚ÄúAs long as you don‚Äôt talk about moral laws and all that sort of thing there‚Äôs no absurdity. For, it‚Äôs obvious, there are no moral laws. There are social customs on the one hand, and there are individuals with their individual feelings and moral reactions on the other. What‚Äôs immoral in one man may not matter in another. Almost nothing, for example, is immoral for me. Positively, you know, I can do anything and yet remain respectable in my own eyes, and in the eyes of others not merely wonderfully decent, but even noble.</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>Ah, what avail the loaded dice?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah, what the tubs of wine?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What every weakness, every vice?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tom Cardan, all were thine.</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p class="continued">I won‚Äôt bore you with the rest of this epitaph which I composed for myself some little time ago. Suffice to say that I point out in the two subsequent stanzas that these things availed absolutely nothing and that, <i xml:lang="fr">malgr√© tout</i>, I remained the honest, sober, pure and high-minded man that everyone always instinctively recognizes me to be.‚Äù <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝCardan emptied his glass and reached out once more for the fiasco.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYou‚Äôre fortunate,‚Äù said Calamy. ‚ÄúIt‚Äôs not all of us whose personalities have such a natural odour of sanctity that they can disinfect our septic actions and render them morally harmless. When I do something stupid or dirty I can‚Äôt help feeling that it is stupid or dirty. My soul lacks virtues to make it wise or clean. And I can‚Äôt dissociate myself from what I do. I wish I could. One does such a devilish number of stupid things. Things one doesn‚Äôt want to do. If only one could be a hedonist and only do what was pleasant! But to be a hedonist one must be wholly rational; there‚Äôs no such thing as a genuine hedonist, there never has been. Instead of doing what one wants to do or what would give one pleasure, one drifts through existence doing exactly the opposite, most of the time‚ÅÝ‚Äîdoing what one has no desire to do, following insane promptings that lead one, fully conscious, into every sort of discomfort, misery, boredom and remorse. Sometimes,‚Äù Calamy went on, sighing, ‚ÄúI positively regret the time I spent in the army during the war. Then, at any rate, there was no question of doing what one liked; there was no liberty, no choice. One did what one was told and that was all. Now I‚Äôm free; I have every opportunity for doing exactly what I like‚ÅÝ‚Äîand I consistently do what I don‚Äôt like.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúBut do you know exactly what you do like?‚Äù asked <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝCardan.</p>
			<p>Calamy shrugged his shoulders. ‚ÄúNot exactly,‚Äù he said. ‚ÄúI suppose I should say reading, and satisfying my curiosity about things, and thinking. But about what, I don‚Äôt feel perfectly certain. I don‚Äôt like running after women, I don‚Äôt like wasting my time in futile social intercourse, or in the pursuit of what is technically known as pleasure. And yet for some reason and quite against my will I find myself passing the greater part of my time immersed in precisely these occupations. It‚Äôs an obscure kind of insanity.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Young Lord Hovenden, who knew that he liked dancing and desired Irene Aldwinkle more than anything in the world, found all this a little incomprehensible. ‚ÄúI can‚Äôt see what vere is to prevent a man from doing what he wants to do. Except,‚Äù he qualified, remembering the teaching of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝFalx, ‚Äúeconomic necessity.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAnd himself,‚Äù added <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝCardan.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAnd what‚Äôs the most depressing of all,‚Äù Calamy went on, without paying attention to the interruption, ‚Äúis the feeling that one will go on like this forever, in the teeth of every effort to stop. I sometimes wish I weren‚Äôt externally free. For then at any rate I should have something to curse at, for getting in my way, other than my own self. Yes, positively, I sometimes wish I were a navvy.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYou wouldn‚Äôt if you had ever been one,‚Äù said Lord Hovenden, gravely and with a knowing air of speaking from personal experience.</p>
			<p>Calamy laughed. ‚ÄúYou‚Äôre perfectly right,‚Äù he said, and drained his glass. ‚ÄúShouldn‚Äôt we think of going to bed?‚Äù</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
