<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>VI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-3" id="chapter-3-6" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</h3>
			<p>The sun had set. Against a pale green sky the blue and purple mountains lifted a jagged silhouette. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan found himself alone in the middle of the flat plain at their feet. He was standing on the bank of a broad ditch, brimming with gleaming water, that stretched away in a straight line apparently for miles across the land, to be lost in the vague twilight distance. Here and there a line of tall thin poplars marked the position of other dykes, intersecting the plain in all directions. There was not a house in sight, not a human being, not even a cow or a grazing donkey. Far away on the slopes of the mountains, whose blue and purple were rapidly darkening to a uniform deep indigo, little yellow lights began to appear, singly or in clusters, attesting the presence of a village or a solitary farm. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan looked at them with irritation; very pretty, no doubt, but he had seen it done better on many musical comedy stages. And in any case, what was the good of a light six or seven miles away, on the hills, when he was standing in the middle of the plain, with nobody in sight, night coming on, and these horrible ditches to prevent one from taking the obvious beeline towards civilization? He had been a fool, he reflected, three or four times over: a fool to refuse Lilian’s offer of the car and go on foot (this fetish of exercise! still, he would certainly have to cut down his drinking if he didn’t take it); a fool to have started so late in the afternoon; a fool to have accepted Italian estimates of distance; and a fool to have followed directions for finding the way given by people who mixed up left and right and, when you insisted on knowing which they meant, told you that either would bring you where you wanted to go. The path which <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan had been following seemed to have come to a sudden end in the waters of this ditch; perhaps it was a suicides’ path. The lake of Massaciuccoli should be somewhere on the further side of the ditch; but where? and how to get across? The twilight rapidly deepened. In a few minutes the sun would have gone down its full eighteen degrees below the horizon and it would be wholly dark. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan swore; but that got him no further. In the end he decided that the best thing to do would be to walk slowly and cautiously along this ditch, in the hope that in time one might arrive, at any rate somewhere. Meanwhile, it would be well to fortify oneself with a bite and a sup. He sat down on the grass and opening his jacket, dipped into the capacious poacher’s pockets excavated in its lining, producing first a loaf, then a few inches of a long polony, then a bottle of red wine; <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan was always prepared against emergencies.</p>
			<p>The bread was stale, the sausage rather horsey and spiced with garlic; but <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan, who had had no tea, ate with a relish. Still more appreciatively he drank. In a little while he felt a little more cheerful. Such are the little crosses, he reflected philosophically, the little crosses one has to bear when one sets out to earn money. If he got through the evening without falling into a ditch, he’d feel that he had paid lightly for his treasure. The greatest bore was these mosquitoes; he lighted a cigar and tried to fumigate them to a respectful distance. Without much success, however. Perhaps the brutes were malarial, too. There might be a little of the disease still hanging about in these marshes; one never knew. It would be tiresome to end one’s days with recurrent fever and an enlarged spleen. It would be tiresome, for that matter, to end one’s days anyhow, in one’s bed or out, naturally or unnaturally, by the act of God or of the King’s enemies. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan’s thoughts took on, all at once, a dismal complexion. Old age, sickness, decrepitude; the bath-chair, the doctor, the bright efficient nurse; and the long agony, the struggle for breath, the thickening darkness, the end, and then⁠—how did that merry little song go?</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>More work for the undertaker,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Nother little job for the coffin-maker.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At the local cemetery they are</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Very very busy with a brand new grave.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He’ll keep warm next winter.</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p class="continued"><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan hummed the tune to himself cheerfully enough. But his tough, knobbly face became so hard, so strangely still, an expression of such bitterness, such a profound melancholy, appeared in his winking and his supercilious eye, that it would have startled and frightened a man to look at him. But there was nobody in that deepening twilight to see him. He sat there alone.</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>At the local cemetery they are</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Very very busy with a brand new grave⁠ ⁠…</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p class="continued">He went on humming. “If I were to fall sick,” he was thinking, “who would look after me? Suppose one were to have a stroke. Hemorrhage on the brain; partial paralysis; mumbling speech; the tongue couldn’t utter what the brain thought; one was fed like a baby; clysters; such a bright doctor, rubbing his hands and smelling of disinfectant and eau de cologne; saw nobody but the nurse; no friends; or once a week, perhaps, for an hour, out of charity; ‘Poor old Cardan, done for, I’m afraid; must send the old chap a fiver⁠—hasn’t a penny, you know; get up a subscription; what a bore; astonishing that he can last so long.⁠ ⁠…’ ”</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>He’ll keep warm next winter.</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p class="continued">The tune ended on a kind of trumpet call, rising from the dominant to the tonic⁠—one dominant, three repeated tonics, drop down again to the dominant and then on the final syllable of “winter” the last tonic. Finis, and no <i xml:lang="it">da capo</i>, no second movement.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan took another swig from his bottle; it was nearly empty now.</p>
			<p>Perhaps one ought to have married. Kitty, for example. She would be old now and fat; or old and thin, like a skeleton very imperfectly disguised. Still, he had been very much in love with Kitty. Perhaps it would have been a good thing if he had married her. Pooh! with a burst of mocking laughter <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan laughed aloud savagely. Marry indeed! She looked very coy, no doubt; but you bet, she was a little tart underneath, and lascivious as you make them. He remembered her with hatred and contempt. Portentous obscenities reverberated through the chambers of his mind.</p>
			<p>He thought of arthritis, he thought of gout, of cataract, of deafness.⁠ ⁠… And in any case, how many years were left him? Ten, fifteen, twenty if he were exceptional. And what years, what years!</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan emptied the bottle and replacing the cork threw it into the black water beneath him. The wine had done nothing to improve his mood. He wished to God he were back at the palace, with people round him to talk to. Alone, he was without defence. He tried to think of something lively and amusing; indoor sports, for example. But instead of indoor sports he found himself contemplating visions of disease, decrepitude, death. And it was the same when he tried to think of reasonable, serious things: what is art, for example? and what was the survival value to a species of eyes or wings or protective colouring in their rudimentary state, before they were developed far enough to see, fly or protect? Why should the individuals having the first and still quite useless variation in the direction of something useful have survived more effectively than those who were handicapped by no eccentricity? Absorbing themes. But <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan couldn’t keep his attention fixed on them. General paralysis of the insane, he reflected, was luckily an ailment for which he had not qualified in the past; luckily! miraculously, even! But stone, but neuritis, but fatty degeneration, but diabetes.⁠ ⁠… Lord, how he wished he had somebody to talk to!</p>
			<p>And all at once, as though in immediate answer to his prayer, he heard the sound of voices approaching through the now complete darkness. “Thank the Lord!” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan, and scrambling to his feet he walked in the direction from which the voices came. Two black silhouettes, one tall and masculine, the other, very small, belonging to a woman, loomed up out of the dark. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan removed the cigar from his mouth, took off his hat and bowed in their direction.</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>“<i xml:lang="it">Nel mezzo del cammin di nostra vita</i>,” he began,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“<i xml:lang="it">mi ritrovai per una selva oscura</i>,</span>
					<br/>
					<span><i xml:lang="it">che la diritta via era smarrita.</i>”</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>How lucky that Dante should also have lost his way, six hundred and twenty-four years ago! “In a word,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan went on, “<i xml:lang="it">ho perso la mia strada</i>⁠—though I have my doubts whether that’s very idiomatic. <i xml:lang="it">Forse potrebbero darmi qualche indicazione.</i>” In the presence of the strangers and at the sound of his own voice conversing, all <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan’s depression had vanished. He was delighted by the fantastic turn he had managed to give the conversation at its inception. Perhaps with a little ingenuity he would be able to find an excuse for treating them to a little Leopardi. It was so amusing to astonish the natives.</p>
			<p>The two silhouettes, meanwhile, had halted at a little distance. When <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan had finished his macaronic self-introduction, the taller of them answered in a harsh and, for a man’s, a shrill voice: “There’s no need to talk Italian. We’re English.”</p>
			<p>“I’m enchanted to hear it,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan protested. And he explained at length and in his mother tongue what had happened to him. It occurred to him, at the same time, that this was a very odd place to find a couple of English tourists.</p>
			<p>The harsh voice spoke again. “There’s a path to Massarosa through the fields,” it said. “And there’s another, in the opposite direction, that joins the Viareggio road. But they’re not very easy to find in the dark, and there are a lot of ditches.”</p>
			<p>“One can but perish in the attempt,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan gallantly.</p>
			<p>This time it was the woman who spoke. “I think it would be better,” she said, “if you slept at our house for the night. You’ll never find the way. I almost tumbled into the ditch myself just now.” She laughed shrilly and more loudly, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan thought, at greater length, than was necessary.</p>
			<p>“But have we room?” asked the man in a tone which showed that he was very reluctant to receive a guest.</p>
			<p>“But you know we’ve got room,” the feminine voice answered in a tone of childlike astonishment. “It’s rough, though.”</p>
			<p>“That doesn’t matter in the least,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan assured her. “I’m most grateful to you for your offer,” he added, making haste to accept the invitation before the man could take it back. He had no desire to go wandering at night among these ditches. Moreover, the prospect of having company, and odd company, he guessed, was alluring. “Most grateful,” he repeated.</p>
			<p>“Well, if you think there’s room,” said the man grudgingly.</p>
			<p>“Of course there is,” the feminine voice replied, and laughed again. “Isn’t it six spare rooms that we’ve got? or is it seven? Come with us, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>⁠ ⁠… <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>“Cardan.”</p>
			<p>“… <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan. We’re going straight home. Such fun,” she added, and repeated her excessive laughter.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan accompanied them, talking as agreeably as he could all the time. The man listened in a gloomy silence. But his sister⁠—<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan had discovered that they were brother and sister and that their name was Elver⁠—laughed heartily at the end of each of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan’s sentences, as though everything he said were a glorious joke; laughed extravagantly and then made some remark which showed that she could have had no idea what <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan had meant. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan found himself making his conversation more and more elementary, until as they approached their destination it was frankly addressed to a child of ten.</p>
			<p>“Here we are at last,” she said, as they emerged from the denser night of a little wood of poplar trees. In front of them rose the large square mass of a house, utterly black but for a single lighted window.</p>
			<p>To the door, when they knocked, came an old woman with a candle. By its light <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan saw his hosts for the first time. That the man was tall and thin he had seen even without the light; he revealed himself now as a stooping, hollow-chested creature of about forty, with long spidery legs and arms and a narrow yellow face, long-nosed, not too powerfully chinned, and lit by small and furtive grey eyes that looked mostly on the ground and seemed afraid of encountering other eyes. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan fancied there was something faintly clerical about his appearance. The man might be a broken-down clergyman⁠—broken-down and possibly, when one considered the furtive eyes, unfrocked as well. He was dressed in a black suit, well cut and not old, but baggy at the knees and bulgy about the pockets of the coat. The nails of his long bony hands were rather dirty and his dark brown hair was too long above the ears and at the back of his neck.</p>
			<p>Miss Elver was nearly a foot shorter than her brother; but she looked as though Nature had originally intended to make her nearly as tall. For her head was too large for her body and her legs too short. One shoulder was higher than the other. In face she somewhat resembled her brother. One saw in it the same long nose, but better shaped, the same weakness of chin; compensated for, however, by an amiable, ever-smiling mouth and large hazel eyes, not at all furtive or mistrustful, but on the contrary exceedingly confiding in their glance, albeit blank and watery in their brightness and not more expressive than the eyes of a young child. Her age, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan surmised, was twenty-eight or thirty. She wore a queer little shapeless dress, like a sack with holes in it for the head and arms to go through, made of some white material with a large design, that looked like an inferior version of the willow pattern, printed on it in bright red. Round her neck she wore two or three sets of gaudy beads. There were bangles on her wrists, and she carried a little reticule made of woven gold chains.</p>
			<p>Using gesture to supplement his scanty vocabulary, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Elver gave instructions to the old woman. She left him the candle and went out. Holding the light high, he led the way from the hall into a large room. They sat down on hard uncomfortable chairs round the empty hearth.</p>
			<p>“Such an uncomfy house!” said Miss Elver. “You know I don’t like Italy much.”</p>
			<p>“Dear, dear,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan. “That’s bad. Don’t you even like Venice? All the boats and gondolas?” And meeting those blank infantile eyes, he felt that he might almost go on about there being no gee-gees. The cat is on the mat; the pig in the gig is a big pig; the lass on the ass a crass lass. And so on.</p>
			<p>“Venice?” said Miss Elver. “I’ve not been there.”</p>
			<p>“Florence, then. Don’t you like Florence?”</p>
			<p>“Nor there, either.”</p>
			<p>“Rome? Naples?”</p>
			<p>Miss Elver shook her head.</p>
			<p>“We’ve only been here,” she said. “All the time.”</p>
			<p>Her brother, who had been sitting, bent forward, his elbows on his knees, his hands clasped in front of him, looking down at the floor, broke silence. “The fact is,” he said in his harsh high voice, “my sister has to keep quiet; she’s doing a rest cure.”</p>
			<p>“Here?” asked <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan. “Doesn’t she find it a bit hot? Rather relaxing?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, it’s awfully hot, isn’t it?” said Miss Elver. “I’m always telling Philip that.”</p>
			<p>“I should have thought you’d have been better at the sea, or in the mountains,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Elver shook his head. “The doctors,” he said mysteriously, and did not go on.</p>
			<p>“And the risk of malaria?”</p>
			<p>“That’s all rot,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Elver, with so much violence, such indignation, that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan could only imagine that he was a landed proprietor in these parts and meant to develop his estate as a health resort.</p>
			<p>“Oh, of course it’s mostly been got rid of,” he said mollifyingly. “The Maremma isn’t what it was.”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Elver said nothing, but scowled at the floor.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
