<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>VII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-3" id="chapter-3-7" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</h3>
			<p>The dining-room was also large and bare. Four candles burned on the long narrow table; their golden brightness faded in the remoter corners to faint twilight; the shadows were huge and black. Entering, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan could fancy himself Don Juan walking down to supper in the Commander’s vault.</p>
			<p>Supper was at once dismal and exceedingly lively. While his sister chattered and laughed unceasingly with her guest, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Elver preserved throughout the meal an unbroken silence. Gloomily he ate his way through the mixed and fragmentary meal which the old woman kept bringing in, relay after unexpected relay, on little dishes from the kitchen. Gloomily too, with the air of a weak man who drinks to give himself courage and the illusion of strength, he drank glass after glass of the strong red wine. He kept his eyes fixed most of the time on the tablecloth in front of his plate; but every now and then he would look up for a second to dart a glance at the other two⁠—for a moment only, then, fearful of being caught in the act and looked at straight in the face, he turned away again.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan enjoyed his supper. Not that the food was particularly good; it was not. The old woman was one of those inept practitioners of Italian cookery who disguise their shortcomings under floods of tomato sauce, with a pinch of garlic thrown in to make the disguise impenetrable. No, what <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan enjoyed was the company. It was a long time since he had sat down with such interesting specimens. One’s range, he reflected, is altogether too narrowly limited. One doesn’t know enough people; one’s acquaintanceship isn’t sufficiently diversified. Burglars, for example, millionaires, imbeciles, clergymen, Hottentots, sea captains⁠—one’s personal knowledge of these most interesting human species is quite absurdly small. Tonight, it seemed to him, he was doing something to widen his range.</p>
			<p>“I’m so glad we met you,” Miss Elver was saying. “In the dark⁠—such a start you gave me too!” She shrieked with laughter. “We were getting so dull here. Weren’t we, Phil?” She appealed to her brother; but <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Elver said nothing, did not even look up. “So dull. I’m awfully glad you were there.”</p>
			<p>“Not so glad as I am, I assure you,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan gallantly.</p>
			<p>Miss Elver looked at him for a moment, coyly and confidentially; then putting up her hand to her face, as though she were screening herself from <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan’s gaze, she turned away, tittering. Her face became quite red. She peeped at him between her fingers and tittered again.</p>
			<p>It occurred to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan that he’d be in for a breach of promise case very soon if he weren’t careful. Tactfully he changed the subject; asked her what sort of food she liked best and learned that her favourites were strawberries, cream ice and mixed chocolates.</p>
			<p>The dessert had been eaten. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Elver suddenly looked up and said: “Grace, I think you ought to go to bed.”</p>
			<p>Miss Elver’s face, from having been bright with laughter, became at once quite overcast. A film of tears floated up into her eyes, making them seem more lustrous; she looked at her brother appealingly. “Must I go?” she said. “Just this once!” She tried to coax him. “This once!”</p>
			<p>But <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Elver was not to be moved. “No, no,” he said sternly. “You must go.”</p>
			<p>His sister sighed and made a little whimpering sound. But she got up, all the same, and walked obediently towards the door. She was almost on the threshold, when she halted, turned and ran back to say good night to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan. “I’m so glad,” she said, “that we found you. Such fun. Good night. But you mustn’t look at me like that.” She put up her hand again to her face. “Oh, not like that.” And still giggling, she ran out of the room.</p>
			<p>There was a long silence.</p>
			<p>“Have some wine,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Elver at last, and pushed the flask in <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan’s direction.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan replenished his glass and then, politely, did the same for his host. Wine⁠—it was the only thing that was likely to make this dismal devil talk. With his practised and professional eye, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan thought he could detect in his host’s expression certain hardly perceptible symptoms of incipient tipsiness. A spidery creature like that, thought <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan contemptuously, couldn’t be expected to hold his liquor well; and he had been putting it down pretty steadily all through supper. A little more and, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan was confident, he’d be as clay in the hands of a sober interrogator (and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan could count on being sober for at least three bottles longer than a poor feeble creature like this); he’d talk, he’d talk; the only difficulty would be to get him to stop talking.</p>
			<p>“Thanks,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Elver, and gloomily gulped down the replenished glass.</p>
			<p>That’s the style, thought <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan; and in his liveliest manner he began to tell the story of the grocer’s brother’s statue and of his pursuit of it, ending up with an account, already more florid than the previous version, of how he lost himself.</p>
			<p>“I console myself superstitiously,” he concluded, “by the reflection that fate wouldn’t have put me to these little troubles and inconveniences if it weren’t intending to do something handsome by me in the end. I’m paying in advance; but I trust I’m paying for something round and tidy. All the same, what a curse this hunt for money is!”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Elver nodded. “It’s the root of all evil,” he said, and emptied his glass. Unobtrusively <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan replenished it.</p>
			<p>“Quite right,” he confirmed. “And it’s twice cursed, if you’ll allow me to play Portia for a moment: it curses him that hath⁠—can you think of a single really rich person of your acquaintance who wouldn’t be less avaricious, less tyrannous, self-indulgent and generally porkish if he didn’t pay supertax? And it also curses him that hath not, making him do all manner of absurd, humiliating, discreditable things which he’d never think of doing if the hedgerows grew breadfruit and bananas and grapes enough to keep one in free food and liquor.”</p>
			<p>“It curses him that hath not the most,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Elver with a sudden savage animation. This was a subject, evidently, on which he felt deeply. He looked sharply at <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan for a moment, then turned away to dip his long nose once more in his tumbler.</p>
			<p>“Perhaps,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan judicially. “At any rate there are more complaints about this curse than about the other. Those that have not complain about their own fate. Those that have do not, it is only those in contact with them⁠—and since the havers are few these too are few⁠—who complain of the curse of having. In my time I have belonged to both categories. Once I had; and I can see that to my fellow men I must then have been intolerable. Now”⁠—<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan drew a deep breath and blew it out between trumpeting lips, to indicate the way in which the money had gone⁠—“now I have not. The curse of insolence and avarice has been removed from me. But what low shifts, what abjections this not-having has, by compensation, reduced me to! Swindling peasants out of their artistic property, for example!”</p>
			<p>“Ah, but that’s not so bad,” cried <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Elver excitedly, “as what I’ve had to do. That’s nothing at all. You’ve never been an advertisement canvasser.”</p>
			<p>“No,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan admitted, “I’ve never been an advertisement canvasser.”</p>
			<p>“Then you can’t know what the curse of not-having really is. You can’t have an idea. You’ve no right to talk about the curse.” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Elver’s harsh, unsteady voice rose and fell excitedly as he talked. “No right,” he repeated.</p>
			<p>“Perhaps I haven’t,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan mollifyingly. He took the opportunity to pour out some more wine for his host. Nobody has a right, he reflected, to be more miserable than we are. Each one of us is the most unhappily circumstanced creature in the world. Hence it’s enormously to our credit that we bear up and get on as well as we do.</p>
			<p>“Look here,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Elver went on confidentially, and he tried to look <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan squarely in the face as he spoke; but the effort was too great and he had to avert his eyes; “look here, let me tell you.” He leaned forward eagerly and slapped the table in front of where <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan was sitting to emphasize what he was saying and to call his guest’s attention to it. “My father was a country parson,” he began, talking rapidly and excitedly. “We were very poor⁠—horribly. Not that he minded much: he used to read Dante all the time. That annoyed my mother⁠—I don’t know why. You know the smell of very plain cooking? Steamed puddings⁠—the very thought of them makes me sick now.” He shuddered. “There were four of us then. But my brother was killed in the war and my elder sister died of influenza. So now there’s only me and the one you saw tonight.” He tapped his forehead. “She never grew up, but got stuck somehow. A moron.” He laughed compassionlessly. “Though I don’t know why I need tell you that. For it’s obvious enough, isn’t it?”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan said nothing. His host flinched away from his half-winking, half-supercilious gaze, and fortifying himself with another gulp of wine, which <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan a moment later unobtrusively made good from the flask, went on:</p>
			<p>“Four of us,” he repeated. “You can imagine it wasn’t easy for my father. And my mother died when we were still children. Still, he managed to send us to a rather shabby specimen of the right sort of school, and we’d have gone on to the university if we could have got scholarships. But we didn’t.” At this <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Elver, on whom the wine seemed quite suddenly to be making its effect, laughed loudly, as though he had made a very good joke. “So my brother went into an engineering firm, and it was just being arranged, at goodness knows what sort of a sacrifice, that I should be turned into a solicitor, when pop! my father falls down dead with heart failure. Well, he was all right rambling about the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Paradiso</i>. But I had to scramble into the nearest job available. That was how I came to be an advertisement canvasser. Oh Lord!” He put his hand over his eyes, as though to shut out some disgusting vision. “Talk of the curse of not-having! For a monthly magazine it was⁠—the sort of one with masses of little ads for indigestion cures; and electric belts to make you strong; and art by correspondence; and Why Wear a Truss? and superfluous hair-killers; and pills to enlarge the female figure; and laboursaving washing machines on the instalment system; and Learn to Play the Piano without Practising; and thirty-six reproductions of nudes from the Paris Salon for five bob; and drink cures in plain wrapper, strictly confidential, and all the rest. There were hundreds and hundreds of small advertisers. I used to spend all my days running round to shops and offices, cajoling old advertisers to renew or fishing for new ones. And, God! how horrible it was! Worming one’s way in to see people who didn’t want to see one and to whom one was only a nuisance, a sort of tiresome beggar on the hunt for money. How polite one had to be to insolent underlings, strong in their office and only too delighted to have an opportunity to play the bully in their turn! And then there was that terrible cheerful, frank, manly manner one had to keep up all the time. The ‘I put it to you, sir,’ straight from the shoulder business; the persuasive honesty, the earnestness and the frightful pretence one had to keep up so strenuously and continuously that one believed in what one was talking about, thought the old magazine a splendid proposition and regarded the inventor of advertisements as the greatest benefactor the human race has ever known. And what a presence one had to have! I could never achieve a presence, somehow. I could never even look neat. And you had to try and impress the devils as a keen, competent salesman. God, it was awful! And the way some of them would treat you. As the damnedest bore in the world⁠—that was the best you could hope. But sometimes they treated you as a robber and a swindler. It was your fault if an insufficient number of imbeciles hadn’t bought galvanic belly bands or learned to play like Busoni without practising. It was your fault; and they’d fly in a rage and curse at you, and you had to be courteous and cheery and tactful and always enthusiastic in the face of it. Good Lord, is there anything more horrible than having to face an angry man? I don’t know why, but it’s somehow so profoundly humiliating to take part in a squabble, even when one’s the aggressor. One feels afterwards that one’s no better than a dog. But when one’s the victim of somebody else’s anger⁠—that’s awful. That’s simply awful,” he repeated, and brought his hand with a clap on to the table to emphasize his words. “I’m not built for that sort of thing. I’m not a bully or a fighter. They used to make me almost ill, those scenes. I couldn’t sleep, thinking of them⁠—remembering those that were past and looking forward with terror to the ones that were coming. People talk about Dostoevsky’s feelings when he was marched out into the barrack square, tied to a post with the firing party lined up in front of him, and then, at the very last second, when his eyes were already bandaged, reprieved. But I tell you I used to go through his experiences half a dozen times a day, nerving myself to face some inevitable interview, the very thought of which made me sick with apprehension. And for me there was no reprieve. The execution was gone through with, to the very end. Good Lord, how often I’ve hesitated at the door of some old bully’s office, all in a bloody sweat, hesitating to cross the threshold. How often I’ve turned back at the last moment and turned into a pub for a nip of brandy to steady my nerves, or gone to a chemist for a pick-me-up! You can’t imagine what I suffered then!” He emptied his glass, as though to drown the rising horror. “Nobody can imagine,” he repeated, and his voice quivered with the anguish of his self-pity. “And then how little one got in return! One suffered daily torture for the privilege of being hardly able to live. And all the things one might have done, if one had had capital! To know for an absolute certainty that⁠—given ten thousand⁠—one could turn them into a hundred thousand in two years; to have the whole plan worked out down to its smallest details, to have thought out exactly how one would live when one was rich, and meanwhile to go on living in poverty and squalor and slavery⁠—that’s the curse of not-having. That’s what <em>I</em> suffered.” Overcome by wine and emotion, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Elver burst into tears.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan patted him on the shoulder. He was too tactful to offer the philosophical consolation that such suffering is the lot of nine-tenths of the human race. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Elver, he could see, would never have forgiven such a denial of his dolorous uniqueness. “You must have courage,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan, and pressing the glass into <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Elver’s hand he added: “Drink some of this. It’ll do you good.”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Elver drank and wiped his eyes. “But I’ll make them smart for it one day,” he said, banging the table with his fist. The violent self-pity of a moment ago transformed itself into an equally violent anger. “I’ll make them all pay for what I suffered. When I’m rich.”</p>
			<p>“That’s the spirit,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan encouragingly.</p>
			<p>“Thirteen years of it I had,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Elver went on. “And two and a half years during the war, dressed in uniform and filling up forms in a wooden hut at Leeds; but that was better than touting for advertisements. Thirteen years. Penal servitude with torture. But I’ll pay them, I’ll pay them.” He banged the table again.</p>
			<p>“Still,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan, “you seem to have got out of it now all right. Living here in Italy is a sign of freedom; at least I hope so.”</p>
			<p>At these words <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Elver’s anger against “them” suddenly dropped. His face took on a mysterious and knowing expression. He smiled to himself what was meant to be a dark, secret and satanic smile, a smile that should be all but imperceptible to the acutest eye. But he found, in his tipsiness, that the smile was growing uncontrollably broader and broader; he wanted to grin, to laugh aloud. Not that what he was secretly thinking about was at all funny; it was not, at any rate when he was sober. But now the whole world seemed to swim in a bubbly sea of hilarity. Moreover, the muscles of his face, when he started to smile satanically, had all at once got out of hand and were insisting on expanding what should have been the expression of Lucifer’s darkest and most fearful thoughts into a bumpkin’s grin. Hastily <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Elver extinguished his face in his glass, in the hope of concealing from his guest that rebellious smile. He emerged again choking. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan had to pat him on the back. When it was all over, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Elver reassumed his mysterious expression and nodded significantly. “Perhaps,” he said darkly, not so much in response to anything <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan had said as on general principles, so to speak, and to indicate that the whole situation was in the last degree dubious, dark and contingent⁠—contingent on a whole chain of further contingencies.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan’s curiosity was roused by the spectacle of this queer pantomime; he refilled his host’s glass. “Still,” he insisted, “if you hadn’t freed yourself, how would you be staying here⁠—” in this horrible marsh, he had almost added; but he checked himself and said “in Italy” instead.</p>
			<p>The other shook his head. “I can’t tell you,” he said darkly, and again the satanic smile threatened to enlarge itself to imbecility.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan relapsed into silence, content to wait. From the expression on <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Elver’s face he could see that the effort of keeping a secret would be, for his host, intolerably great. The fruit must be left to ripen of itself. He said nothing and looked pensively into one of the dark corners of the tomb-like chamber as though occupied with his own thoughts.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Elver sat hunched up in his chair, frowning at the table in front of him. Every now and then he took a sip of wine. Tipsily mutable, his mood changed all at once from hilarious to profoundly gloomy. The silence, the darkness funereally tempered by the four unwavering candles, worked on his mind. What a moment since had seemed an uproarious joke now presented itself to his thoughts as appalling. He felt a great need to unburden himself, to transfer responsibilities on to other shoulders, to get advice that should confirm him in his course. Furtively, for a glimpse only, he looked at his guest. How abstractedly and regardlessly he was staring into vacancy! Not a thought, no sympathy for poor Philip Elver. Ah, if he only knew.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>He broke silence at last. “Tell me,” he said abruptly, and it seemed to his drunken mind that he was displaying an incredible subtlety in his method of approaching the subject; “do you believe in vivisection?”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan was surprised by the question. “Believe in it?” he echoed. “I don’t quite know how one can <em>believe</em> in vivisection. I think it useful, if that’s what you mean.”</p>
			<p>“You don’t think it’s wrong?”</p>
			<p>“No,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan.</p>
			<p>“You think it doesn’t matter cutting up animals?”</p>
			<p>“Not if the cutting serves some useful human purpose.”</p>
			<p>“You don’t think animals have got rights?” pursued <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Elver with a clarity and tenacity that, in a drunken man, surprised <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan. This was a subject, it was clear, on which <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Elver must long have meditated. “Just like human beings?”</p>
			<p>“No,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan. “I’m not one of those fools who think that one life is as good as another, simply because it <em>is</em> a life; that a grasshopper is as good as a dog and a dog as good as a man. You must recognize a hierarchy of existences.”</p>
			<p>“A hierarchy,” exclaimed <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Elver, delighted with the word, “a hierarchy⁠—that’s it. That’s exactly it. A hierarchy. And among human beings too?” he added.</p>
			<p>“Yes, of course,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan affirmed. “The life of the soldier who killed Archimedes isn’t worth the life of Archimedes. It’s the fundamental fallacy of democracy and humanitarian Christianity to suppose that it is. Though of course,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan added pensively, “one has no justifying reason for saying so, but only one’s instinctive taste. For the soldier, after all, may have been a good husband and father, may have spent the nonprofessional, unsoldierly portions of his life in turning the left cheek and making two blades of grass grow where only one grew before. If, like Tolstoy, your tastes run to good fatherhood, left cheeks and agriculture, then you’ll say that the life of the soldier is worth just as much as the life of Archimedes⁠—much more, indeed; for Archimedes was a mere geometrician, who occupied himself with lines and angles, curves and surfaces, instead of with good and evil, husbandry and religion. But if, on the contrary, one’s tastes are of a more intellectual cast, then one will think as I think⁠—that the life of Archimedes is worth the lives of several billion of even the most amiable soldiers. But as for saying which point of view is right⁠—” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan shrugged his shoulders. “Partner, I leave it to you.”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Elver seemed rather disappointed by the inconclusive turn that his guest’s discourse had taken. “But still,” he insisted, “it’s obvious that a wise man’s better than a fool. There <em>is</em> a hierarchy.”</p>
			<p>“Well, I personally should say there was,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan. “But I can’t speak for others.” He saw that he had been carried away by the pleasures of speculation into saying things his host did not want to hear. To almost all men, even when they are sober, a suspense of judgment is extraordinarily distasteful. And <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Elver was far from sober; moreover, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan began to suspect, this philosophic conversation was a tortuous introduction to personal confidences. If one wanted the confidences one must agree with the would-be confider’s opinion. That was obvious.</p>
			<p>“Good,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Elver. “Then you’ll admit that an intelligent man is worth more than an imbecile, a moron; ha ha, a moron.⁠ ⁠…” And at this word he burst into violent and savage laughter, which, becoming more and more extravagant as it prolonged itself, turned at last into an uncontrollable screaming and sobbing.</p>
			<p>His chair turned sideways to the table, his legs crossed, the fingers of one hand playing caressingly with his wine glass, the other manipulating his cigar, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan looked on, while his host, the tears streaming down his cheeks, his narrow face distorted almost out of recognition, laughed and sobbed, now throwing himself back in his chair, now covering his face with his hands, now bending forward over the table to rest his forehead on his arms, while his whole body shook and shook with the repeated and uncontrollable spasms. A disgusting sight, thought <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan; and a disgusting specimen too. He began to have an inkling of what the fellow was up to. Translate “intelligent man” and “moron” into “me” and “my sister’⁠—for the general, the philosophical in any man’s conversation must always be converted into the particular and personal if you want to understand him⁠—interpret in personal terms what he had said about vivisection, animal rights and the human hierarchy, and there appeared, as the plain transliteration of the cipher⁠—what? Something that looked exceedingly villainous, thought <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan.</p>
			<p>“Then I suppose,” he said in a very cool and level voice, when the other had begun to recover from his fit, “I suppose it’s your sister who has the liberating cash.”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Elver glanced at him, with an expression of surprise, almost of alarm, on his face. His eyes wavered away from <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan’s steady, genial gaze. He took refuge in his tumbler. “Yes,” he said, when he had taken a gulp. “How did you guess?”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan shrugged his shoulders. “Purely at random,” he said.</p>
			<p>“After my father died,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Elver explained, “she went to live with her godmother, who was the old lady at the big house in our parish. A nasty old woman she was. But she took to Grace, she kind of adopted her. When the old bird died at the beginning of this year, Grace found she’d been left twenty-five thousand.”</p>
			<p>For all comment, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan clicked his tongue against his palate and slightly raised his eyebrows.</p>
			<p>“Twenty-five thousand,” the other repeated. “A half-wit, a moron! What can she do with it?”</p>
			<p>“She can take you to Italy,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan suggested.</p>
			<p>“Oh, of course we can live on the interest all right,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Elver contemptuously. “But when I think how I could multiply it.” He leaned forward eagerly, looking into <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan’s face for a second, then the shifty grey eyes moved away and fixed themselves on one of the buttons of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan’s coat, from which they would occasionally dart upwards again to reconnoitre and return. “I’ve worked it out, you see,” he began, talking so quickly that the words tumbled over one another and became almost incoherent. “The Trade Cycle.⁠ ⁠… I can prophesy exactly what’ll happen at any given moment. For instance⁠ ⁠…” He rambled on in a series of complicated explanations.</p>
			<p>“Well, if you’re as certain as all that,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan when he had finished, “why don’t you get your sister to lend you the money?”</p>
			<p>“Why not?” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Elver repeated gloomily and leaned back again in his chair. “Because that blasted old hag had the capital tied up. It can’t be touched.”</p>
			<p>“Perhaps she lacked faith in the Trade Cycle,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan suggested.</p>
			<p>“God rot her!” said the other fervently. “And when I think of what I’d do with the money when I’d made really a lot. Science, art⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>“Not to mention revenge on your old acquaintances,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan, cutting him short. “You’ve worked out the whole programme?”</p>
			<p>“Everything,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Elver. “There’d never have been anything like it. And now this damned fool of an old woman goes and gives the money to her pet moron and makes it impossible for me to touch it.” He ground his teeth with rage and disgust.</p>
			<p>“But if your sister were to die unmarried,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan, “the money, I suppose, would be yours.”</p>
			<p>The other nodded.</p>
			<p>“It’s a very hierarchical question, certainly,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan. In the vault-like room there was a prolonged silence.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Elver had reached the final stage of intoxication. Almost suddenly he began to feel weak, profoundly weary and rather ill. Anger, hilarity, the sense of satanic power⁠—all had left him. He desired only to go to bed as soon as possible; at the same time he doubted his capacity to get there. He shut his eyes.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan looked at the limp and sodden figure with an expert’s eye, scientifically observing it. It was clear to him that the creature would volunteer no more; that it had come to a state when it could hardly think of anything but the gradually mounting nausea within it. It was time to change tactics. He leaned forward, and tapping his host’s arm launched a direct attack.</p>
			<p>“So you brought the poor girl here to get rid of her,” he said.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Elver opened his eyes and flashed at his tormentor a hunted and terrified look. His face became very pale. He turned away. “No, no, not that.” His voice had sunk to an unsteady whisper.</p>
			<p>“Not that?” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan echoed scornfully. “But it’s obvious. And you’ve as good as been telling me so for the last half-hour.”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Elver could only go on whispering: “No.”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan ignored the denial. “How did you propose to do it?” he asked. “It’s always risky, whatever way you choose, and I shouldn’t put you down as being particularly courageous. How, how?”</p>
			<p>The other shook his head.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan insisted, ruthlessly. “Ratsbane?” he queried. “Steel?⁠—no, you wouldn’t have the guts for that. Or did you mean that she should tumble by accident into one of those convenient ditches?”</p>
			<p>“No, no. No.”</p>
			<p>“But I insist on being told,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan truculently, and he thumped the table till the reflections of the candles in the brimming glasses quivered and rocked.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Elver put his face in his hands and burst into tears. “You’re a bully,” he sobbed, “a dirty bully, like all the rest.”</p>
			<p>“Come, come,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan protested encouragingly. “Don’t take it so hardly. I’m sorry I upset you. You mustn’t think,” he added, “that I have any of the vulgar prejudices about this affair. I’m not condemning you. Far from it. I don’t want to use your answers against you. I merely ask out of curiosity⁠—pure curiosity. Cheer up, cheer up. Try a little more wine.”</p>
			<p>But <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Elver was feeling too deplorably sick to be able to think of wine without horror. He refused it, shuddering. “I didn’t mean to do anything,” he whispered. “I meant it just to happen.”</p>
			<p>“Just to happen? Yours must be a very hopeful nature,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan.</p>
			<p>“It’s in Dante, you know. My father brought us up on Dante; I loathed the stuff,” he added, as though it had been castor oil. “But things stuck in my mind. Do you remember the woman who tells how she died: ‘<i xml:lang="it">Siena mi fe’, disfecemi Maremma</i>’? Her husband shut her up in a castle in the Maremma and she died of fever. Do you remember?”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan nodded.</p>
			<p>“That was the idea. I had the quinine: I’ve been taking ten grains a day ever since I arrived⁠—for safety’s sake. But there doesn’t seem to be any fever here nowadays,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Elver added. “We’ve been here nine weeks.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>“And nothing’s happened!” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan leaned back in his chair and roared with laughter. “Well, the moral of that,” he added, when he had breath enough to begin talking again, “the moral of that is: See that your authorities are up to date.”</p>
			<p>But <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Elver was past seeing a joke. He got up from his chair and stood unsteadily, supporting himself with a hand on the table. “Would you mind helping me to my room?” he faintly begged. “I don’t feel very well.”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan helped him first into the garden. “You ought to learn to carry your liquor more securely,” he said, when the worst was over. “That’s another of the evening’s morals.”</p>
			<p>When he had lighted his host to bed, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan went to his appointed room and undressed. It was a long time before he fell asleep. The mosquitoes, partly, and partly his own busy thoughts, were responsible for his wakefulness.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
