<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>III</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-2" id="chapter-2-3" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</h3>
			<p>I remember an advertisement⁠—for some sort of cough drops I think it was⁠—which used to figure very largely in my boyhood on the back covers of the illustrated weeklies. Over the legend, “A Pine Forest in every Home,” appeared a picture of three or four magnificent Norway spruces growing out of the drawing-room carpet, while the lady of the house, her children and guests took tea, with a remarkable air of unconcern and as though it was quite natural to have a sequoia sprouting out of the hearthrug, under their sanitary and aromatic shade. A Pine Forest in every Home.⁠ ⁠… But I have thought of something even better. A Luna Park in every Office. A British Empire Exhibition Fun Fair in every Bank. An Earl’s Court in every Factory. True, I cannot claim to bring every attraction of the Fun Fair into your place of labour⁠—only the switchback, the water-shoot and the mountain railway. Merry-go-round, wiggle-woggle, flip-flap and the like are beyond the power of my magic to conjure up. Horizontal motion and a rotary giddiness I cannot claim to reproduce; my speciality is headlong descents, breathlessness and that delicious sickening feeling that your entrails have been left behind on an upper storey. Those who chafe at the tameness and sameness of office life, who pine for a little excitement to diversify the quotidian routine, should experiment with this little recipe of mine and bring the water-shoot into the countinghouse. It is quite simple. All you have got to do is to pause for a moment in your work and ask yourself: Why am I doing this? What is it all for? Did I come into the world, supplied with a soul which may very likely be immortal, for the sole purpose of sitting every day at this desk? Ask yourself these questions thoughtfully, seriously. Reflect even for a moment on their significance⁠—and I can guarantee that, firmly seated though you may be in your hard or your padded chair, you will feel all at once that the void has opened beneath you, that you are sliding headlong, fast and faster, into nothingness.</p>
			<p>For those who cannot dispense with formularies and fixed prayers, I recommend this little catechism, to be read through in office hours whenever time hangs a little heavy.</p>
			<p><i>Q.</i> Why am I working here?</p>
			<p><i>A.</i> In order that Jewish stockbrokers may exchange their Rovers for Armstrong-Siddeleys, buy the latest jazz records and spend the weekend at Brighton.</p>
			<p><i>Q.</i> Why do I go on working here?</p>
			<p><i>A.</i> In the hope that I too may some day be able to spend the weekend at Brighton.</p>
			<p><i>Q.</i> What is progress?</p>
			<p><i>A.</i> Progress is stockbrokers, more stockbrokers and still more stockbrokers.</p>
			<p><i>Q.</i> What is the aim of social reformers?</p>
			<p><i>A.</i> The aim of social reformers is to create a state in which every individual enjoys the greatest possible amount of freedom and leisure.</p>
			<p><i>Q.</i> What will the citizens of this reformed state do with their freedom and leisure?</p>
			<p><i>A.</i> They will do, presumably, what the stockbrokers do with these things today, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">e.g.</abbr> spend the weekend at Brighton, ride rapidly in motor vehicles and go to the theatre.</p>
			<p><i>Q.</i> On what condition can I live a life of contentment?</p>
			<p><i>A.</i> On the condition that you do not think.</p>
			<p><i>Q.</i> What is the function of newspapers, cinemas, radios, motorbikes, jazz bands, etc?</p>
			<p><i>A.</i> The function of these things is the prevention of thought and the killing of time. They are the most powerful instruments of human happiness.</p>
			<p><i>Q.</i> What did Buddha consider the most deadly of the deadly sins?</p>
			<p><i>A.</i> Unawareness, stupidity.</p>
			<p><i>Q.</i> And what will happen if I make myself aware, if I actually begin to think?</p>
			<p><i>A.</i> Your swivel chair will turn into a trolley on the mountain railway, the office floor will gracefully slide away from beneath you and you will find yourself launched into the abyss.</p>
			<p>Down, down, down! The sensation, though sickening, is really delightful. Most people, I know, find it a little too much for them and consequently cease to think, in which case the trolley reconverts itself into the swivel chair, the floor closes up and the hours at the desk seem once more to be hours passed in a perfectly reasonable manner; or else, more rarely, flee in panic horror from the office to bury their heads like ostriches in religion or whatnot. For a strong-minded and intelligent person both courses are inadmissible; the first because it is stupid and the second because it is cowardly. No self-respecting man can either accept unreflectingly or, having reflected upon it, irresponsibly run away from the reality of human life. The proper course, I flatter myself, is that which I have adopted. Having sought out the heart of reality⁠—Gog’s Court, to be explicit⁠—I have taken up my position there; and though fully aware of the nature of the reality by which I am surrounded, though deliberately keeping myself reminded of the complete imbecility of what I am doing, I yet remain heroically at my post. My whole time is passed on the switchback; all my life is one unceasing slide through nothing.</p>
			<p>All my life, I insist; for it is not merely into Gog’s Court that I magically introduce the fun of the fair. I so arrange my private life that I am sliding even out of office hours. My heart, to borrow the poetess’s words, is like a singing bird whose nest is permanently in a water-shoot. Miss Carruthers’s boardinghouse in Chelsea is, I assure you, as suitable a place to slither in as any east of Temple Bar. I have lived there now for four years. I am a pillar of the establishment and every evening, when I sit down to dinner with my fellow guests, I feel as though I were taking my place in a specially capacious family trolley on the switchback railway. All aboard! and away we go. With gathering momentum the trolley plunges down into vacancy.</p>
			<p>Let me describe an evening on the Domestic water-shoot. At the head of the table sits Miss Carruthers herself; thirty-seven, plump though unmarried, with a face broadening towards the base and very flabby about the cheeks and chin⁠—bull-doggy, in a word; and the snub nose, staring at you out of its upward-tilted nostrils, the small brown eyes do not belie the comparison. And what activity! never walks, but runs about her establishment like a demoniac, never speaks but shrilly shouts, carves the roast beef with scientific fury, laughs like a giant woodpecker. She belongs to a distinguished family which would never, in its days of glory, have dreamed of allowing one of its daughters to become what Miss Carruthers calls, applying to herself the most humiliating of titles and laughing as she does so, to emphasize the picturesque contrast between what she is by birth and what circumstance has reduced her to becoming, “a common lodging-house keeper.” She is a firm believer in her class, and to her more distinguished guests deplores the necessity under which she labours to admit into her establishment persons not really, really⁠ ⁠… She is careful not to mix people of different sorts together. Her most genteel guests sit the closest to her at table; it is implied that, in the neighbourhood of Miss Carruthers, they will feel at home. For years I have had the honour of sitting at her left hand; for if less prosperous than <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Cloudesley Shove, the broker’s widow (who sits in glory on the right), I have at least attended in my youth an ancient seat of learning.</p>
			<p>The gong reverberates; punctually I hurry down to the dining-room. With fury and precision, like a conductor immersed in a Wagner overture, Miss Carruthers is carving the beef.</p>
			<p>“Evening, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Chelifer,” she loudly calls, without interrupting her labours. “What news have you brought back with you from the city today?”</p>
			<p>Affably I smile, professionally I rub the hands. “Well, I don’t know that I can think of any.”</p>
			<p>“Evening, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Fox. Evening, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Fox.” The two old people take their places near the further end of the table. They are not quite, quite⁠ ⁠… “Evening, Miss Monad.” Miss Monad does responsible secretarial work and sits next to the Fox’s. “Evening, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Quinn. Evening, Miss Webber. Evening, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Crotch.” But the tone in which she responds to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Dutt’s courteous greeting is much less affable. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Dutt is an Indian⁠—a black man, Miss Carruthers calls him. Her “Evening, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Dutt” shows that she knows her place and hopes that the man of the inferior race knows his. The servant comes in with a steaming dish of greens. <i xml:lang="it">Crambe ripetita</i>⁠—inspiring perfume! Mentally I burst into song.</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>These like remorse inveterate memories,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Being of cabbage, are prophetic too</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of future feasts, when <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Cloudesley Shove</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will still recall lamented Cloudesley.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among the moonlit cedars Philomel</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Calls back to mind, again, again,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The ancient pain, the everlasting pain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And still inveterately the haunted air</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Remembers and foretells that roses were</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Red and tomorrow will again be red,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, “Cloudesley, Cloudesley!” Philomel in vain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sobs on the night; for Cloudesley Shove is dead.⁠ ⁠…</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>And in the flesh, as though irresistibly summoned by my incantation, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Cloudesley Shove blackens the doorway with her widowhood.</p>
			<p>“Not a very naice day,” says <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Cloudesley, as she sits down.</p>
			<p>“Not at all,” Miss Carruthers heartily agrees. And then, without turning from the beef, without abating for an instant the celerity of her carving, “Fluffy!” she shouts through the increasing din, “don’t giggle like that.”</p>
			<p>Politely <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Chelifer half raises himself from his chair as Miss Fluffy comes tumbling, on the tail end of her giggle, into the chair next to his. Always the perfect gent.</p>
			<p>“I wasn’t giggling, Miss Carruthers,” Fluffy protests. Her smile reveals above the roots of her teeth a line of almost bloodless gums.</p>
			<p>“Quite true,” says young <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Brimstone, following her less tumultuously from the door and establishing himself in the seat opposite, next to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Cloudesley. “She wasn’t giggling. She was merely cachinnating.”</p>
			<p>Everybody laughs uproariously, even Miss Carruthers, though she does not cease to carve. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Brimstone remains perfectly grave. Behind his rimless pince-nez there is hardly so much as a twinkle. As for Miss Fluffy, she fairly collapses.</p>
			<p>“What a horrible man!” she screams through her laughter, as soon as she has breath enough to be articulate. And picking up her bread, she makes as though she were going to throw it across the table in <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Brimstone’s face.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Brimstone holds up a finger. “Now you be careful,” he admonishes. “If you don’t behave, you’ll be put in the corner and sent to bed without your supper.”</p>
			<p>There is a renewal of laughter.</p>
			<p>Miss Carruthers intervenes. “Now don’t tease her, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Brimstone.”</p>
			<p>“Tease?” says <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Brimstone, in the tone of one who has been misjudged. “But I was only applying moral suasion, Miss Carruthers.”</p>
			<p>Inimitable Brimstone! He is the life and soul of Miss Carruthers’s establishment. So serious, so clever, such an alert young city man⁠—but withal so exquisitely waggish, so gallant! To see him with Fluffy⁠—it’s as good as a play.</p>
			<p>“There!” says Miss Carruthers, putting down her carving tools with a clatter. Loudly, energetically, she addresses herself to her duties as a hostess. “I went to Buszard’s this afternoon,” she proclaims, not without pride. We old county families have always bought our chocolate at the best shops. “But it isn’t what it used to be.” She shakes her head; the high old feudal times are past. “It isn’t the same. Not since the A.B.C. took it over.”</p>
			<p>“Do you see,” asks <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Brimstone, becoming once more his serious self, “that the new Lyons Corner House in Piccadilly Circus will be able to serve fourteen million meals a year?” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Brimstone is always a mine of interesting statistics.</p>
			<p>“No, really?” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Cloudesley is astonished.</p>
			<p>But old <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Fox, who happens to have read the same evening paper as <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Brimstone, takes almost the whole credit of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Brimstone’s erudition to himself by adding, before the other has time to say it: “Yes, and that’s just twice as many meals as any American restaurant can serve.”</p>
			<p>“Good old England!” cried Miss Carruthers patriotically. “These Yanks haven’t got us beaten in everything yet.”</p>
			<p>“So naice, I always think, these Corner Houses,” says <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Cloudesley. “And the music they play is really quite classical, you know, sometimes.”</p>
			<p>“Quite,” says <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Chelifer, savouring voluptuously the pleasure of dropping steeply from the edge of the convivial board into interstellar space.</p>
			<p>“And so sumptuously decorated,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Cloudesley continues.</p>
			<p>But <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Brimstone knowingly lets her know that the marble on the walls is less than a quarter of an inch thick.</p>
			<p>And the conversation proceeds. “The Huns,” says Miss Carruthers, “are only shamming dead.” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Fox is in favour of a business government. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Brimstone would like to see a few strikers shot, to encourage the rest; Miss Carruthers agrees. From below the salt Miss Monad puts in a word for the working classes, but her remark is treated with the contempt it deserves. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Cloudesley finds Charlie Chaplin so vulgar, but likes Mary Pickford. Miss Fluffy thinks that the Prince of Wales ought to marry a nice simple English girl. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Brimstone says something rather cutting about <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Asquith and Lady Diana Manners. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Cloudesley, who has a profound knowledge of the Royal Family, mentions the Princess Alice. Contrapuntally to this, Miss Webber and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Quinn have been discussing the latest plays and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Chelifer has engaged Miss Fluffy in a conversation which soon occupies the attention of all the persons sitting at the upper end of the table⁠—a conversation about flappers. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Cloudesley, Miss Carruthers and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Brimstone agree that the modern girl is too laxly brought up. Miss Fluffy adheres in piercing tones to the opposite opinion. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Brimstone makes some splendid jokes at the expense of coeducation, and all concur in deploring cranks of every variety. Miss Carruthers, who has a short way with dissenters, would like to see them tarred and feathered⁠—all except pacifists, who, like strikers, could do with a little shooting. Lymphatic <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Cloudesley, with sudden and surprising ferocity, wants to treat the Irish in the same way. (Lamented Cloudesley had connections with Belfast.) But at this moment a deplorable incident occurs. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Dutt, the Indian, who ought never, from his lower sphere, even to have listened to the conversation going on in the higher, leans forward and speaking loudly across the intervening gulf ardently espouses the Irish cause. His eloquence rolls up the table between two hedges of horrified silence. For a moment nothing can be heard but ardent nationalistic sentiments and the polite regurgitation of prune stones. In the presence of this shocking and unfamiliar phenomenon nobody knows exactly what to do. But Miss Carruthers rises, after the first moment, to the occasion.</p>
			<p>“Ah, but then, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Dutt,” she says, interrupting his tirade about oppressed nationalities, “you must remember that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Cloudesley Shove is English. <em>You</em> can hardly expect to understand what <em>she</em> feels. Can you?”</p>
			<p>We all feel inclined to clap. Without waiting to hear <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Dutt’s reply, and leaving three prunes uneaten on her plate, Miss Carruthers gets up and sweeps with dignity towards the door. Loudly, in the corridor, she comments on the insolence of black men. And what ingratitude, too!</p>
			<p>“After I had made a special exception in his case to my rule against taking coloured people!”</p>
			<p>We all sympathize. In the drawing-room the conversation proceeds. Headlong the trolley plunges.</p>
			<p>A home away from home⁠—that was how Miss Carruthers described her establishment in the prospectus. It was the awayness of it that first attracted me to the place. The vast awayness from what I had called home up till the time I first stayed there⁠—that was what made me decide to settle for good at Miss Carruthers’s. From the house where I was born Miss Carruthers’s seemed about as remote as any place one could conveniently find.</p>
			<p>“I remember, I remember⁠ ⁠…” It is a pointless and futile occupation, difficult none the less not to indulge in. I remember. Our house at Oxford was dark, spiky and tall. Ruskin himself, it was said, had planned it. The front windows looked out on to the Banbury Road. On rainy days, when I was a child, I used to spend whole mornings staring down into the thoroughfare. Every twenty minutes a tramcar drawn by two old horses, trotting in their sleep, passed with an undulating motion more slowly than a man could walk. The little garden at the back once seemed enormous and romantic, the rocking-horse in the nursery a beast like an elephant. The house is sold now and I am glad of it. They are dangerous, these things and places inhabited by memory. It is as though, by a process of metempsychosis, the soul of dead events goes out and lodges itself in a house, a flower, a landscape, in a group of trees seen from the train against the skyline, an old snapshot, a broken penknife, a book, a perfume. In these memory-charged places, among these things haunted by the ghosts of dead days, one is tempted to brood too lovingly over the past, to live it again, more elaborately, more consciously, more beautifully and harmoniously, almost as though it were an imagined life in the future. Surrounded by these ghosts one can neglect the present in which one bodily lives. I am glad the place is sold; it was dangerous. <i xml:lang="it">Evviva</i> Miss Carruthers!</p>
			<p>Nevertheless my thoughts, as I lay on the water that morning, reverted from the Home Away to the other home from which it was so distant. I recalled the last visit I had paid to the old house, a month or two since, just before my mother finally decided herself to move out. Mounting the steps that led up to the ogival porch I had felt like an excavator on the threshold of a tomb. I tugged at the wrought-iron bell pull; joints creaked, wires wheezily rattled, and far off, as though accidentally, by an afterthought, tinkled the cracked bell. In a moment the door would open, I should walk in, and there, there in the unrifled chamber the royal mummy would be lying⁠—my own.</p>
			<p>Nothing within those Gothic walls ever changed. Imperceptibly the furniture grew older; the wallpapers and the upholstery recalled with their noncommittal russets and sage-greens the refinements of another epoch. And my mother herself, pale and grey-haired, draped in the dateless dove-grey dresses she had always worn, my mother was still the same. Her smile was the same dim gentle smile; her voice still softly modulated, like a studied and cultured music, from key to key. Her hair was hardly greyer⁠—for it had whitened early and I was a late-born child⁠—than I always remember it to have been. Her face was hardly more deeply wrinkled. She walked erect, seemed still as active as ever, she had grown no thinner and no stouter.</p>
			<p>And she was still surrounded by those troops of derelict dogs, so dreadfully profuse, poor beasts! in their smelly gratitude. There were still the same moth-eaten cats picked up starving at a street corner to be harboured in luxury⁠—albeit on a diet that was, on principle, strictly vegetarian⁠—in the best rooms of the house. Poor children still came for buns and tea and traditional games in the garden⁠—so traditional, very often, that nobody but my mother had ever heard of them; still came, when the season happened to be winter, for gloves and woolly stockings and traditional games indoors. And the writing-table in the drawing-room was piled high, as it had always been piled, with printed appeals for some deserving charity. And still in her beautiful calligraphy my mother addressed the envelopes that were to contain them, slowly, one after another⁠—and each a little work of art, like a page from a medieval missal, and each destined, without reprieve, to the waste-paper basket.</p>
			<p>All was just as it had always been. Ah, but not quite, all the same! For though the summer term was in full swing and the afternoon bright, the little garden behind the house was deserted and unmelodious. Where were the morris dancers, where the mixolydian strains? And remembering that music, those dances, those distant afternoons, I could have wept.</p>
			<p>In one corner of the lawn my mother used to sit at the little harmonium; I sat beside her to turn the pages of the music. In the opposite corner were grouped the dancers. My mother looked up over the top of the instrument; melodiously she inquired:</p>
			<p>“Which dance shall we have next, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Toft? ‘Trenchmore’? Or ‘Omnium Gatherum’? Or ‘John Come Kiss Me Now’? Or what do you say to ‘Up Tails All’? Or ‘Rub Her Down with Straw’? Or ‘An Old Man’s a Bed Full of Bones’? Such an <i xml:lang="fr">embarras de richesse</i>, isn’t there?”</p>
			<p>And <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Toft would break away from his little company of dancers and come across the lawn wiping his face⁠—for “Hoite-cum-Toite” a moment before had been a most furious affair. It was a grey face with vague indeterminate features and a bright almost clerical smile in the middle of it. When he spoke it was in a very rich voice.</p>
			<p>“Suppose we try ‘Fading,’ <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Chelifer,” he suggested. “ ‘Fading Is a Fine Dance’⁠—you remember the immortal words of the Citizen’s Wife in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Knight of the Burning Pestle</i>? Ha ha!” And he gave utterance to a little laugh, applausive of his own wit. For to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Toft every literary allusion was a joke, and the obscurer the allusion the more exquisite the waggery. It was rarely, alas, that he found anyone to share his merriment. My mother was one of the few people who always made a point of smiling whenever <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Toft laughed at himself. She smiled even when she could not track the allusion to its source. Sometimes she even went so far as to laugh. But my mother had no facility for laughter; by nature she was a grave and gentle smiler.</p>
			<p>And so “Fading” it would be. My mother touched the keys and the gay, sad mixolydian air came snoring out of the harmonium like a strangely dissipated hymn tune. “One, two, three⁠ ⁠…” called <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Toft richly. And then in unison all five⁠—the don, the two undergraduates, the two young ladies from North Oxford⁠—would beat the ground with their feet, would prance and stamp till the garters of little bells round the gentlemen’s grey flannel trousers (it went without saying, for some reason, that the ladies should not wear them) jingled like the bells of a runaway hansom-cab horse. One, two, three.⁠ ⁠… The Citizen’s Wife (ha ha!) was right. Fading is a fine dance indeed. Everybody dances Fading. Poor <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Toft had faded out of Oxford, had danced completely out of life, like Lycidas (tee-hee!) before his prime. Influenza had faded him. And of the undergraduates who had danced here, first and last, with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Toft⁠—how many of them had danced Fading under the German barrage? Young Flint, the one who used always to address his tutor as “<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Toft⁠—oh, I mean Clarence” (for <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Toft was one of those genial boyish dons who insisted on being called by their Christian names), young Flint was dead for certain. And Ramsden too, I had a notion that Ramsden too was dead.</p>
			<p>And then there were the young women from North Oxford. What, for example, of Miss Dewball’s cheeks? How had those cabbage roses weathered the passage of the years? But for Miss Higlett, of course, there could be no more fading, no further desiccation. She was already a harebell baked in sand. Unwithering Higlett, blowsy Dewball.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>And I myself, I too had faded. The Francis Chelifer who, standing by the dissipated harmonium, had turned the pages of his mother’s music, was as wholly extinct as <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Toft. Within this Gothic tomb reposed his mummy. My weekend visits were archaeological expeditions.</p>
			<p>“Now that poor <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Toft’s dead,” I asked as we walked, my mother and I, that afternoon, up and down the little garden behind the house, “isn’t there anyone else here who’s keen on morris dancing?” Or were those folky days, I wondered, forever past?</p>
			<p>My mother shook her head. “The enthusiasm for it is gone,” she said sadly. “This generation of undergraduates doesn’t seem to take much interest in that kind of thing. I don’t really know,” she added, “what it <em>is</em> interested in.”</p>
			<p>What indeed, I reflected. In my young days it had been Social Service and Fabianism; it had been long hearty walks in the country at four and a half miles an hour, with draughts of Five <span epub:type="z3998:roman">X</span> beer at the end of them, and Rabelaisian song and conversations with yokels in incredibly picturesque little wayside inns; it had been reading parties in the Lakes and climbing in the Jura; it had been singing in the Bach Choir and even⁠—though somehow I had never been able quite to rise to that⁠—even morris dancing with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Toft.⁠ ⁠… But Fading is a fine dance, and all these occupations seemed now a little queer. Still, I caught myself envying the being who had lived within my skin and joined in these activities.</p>
			<p>“Poor Toft!” I meditated. “Do you remember the way he had of calling great men by little pet names of his own? Just to show that he was on terms of familiarity with them, I suppose. Shakespeare was always Shake-bake, which was short, in its turn, for Shake-Bacon. And Oven, <i xml:lang="fr">tout court</i>, was Beethoven.”</p>
			<p>“And always <abbr epub:type="z3998:personal-name">J. S. B.</abbr> for Bach,” my mother continued, smiling elegiacally.</p>
			<p>“Yes, and Pee Em for Philipp Emanuel Bach. And Madame Dudevant for George Sand, or, alternatively, I remember, ‘The Queen’s Monthly Nurse’⁠—because Dickens thought she looked like that the only time he saw her.” I recalled the long-drawn and delighted laughter which used to follow that allusion.</p>
			<p>“You were never much of a dancer, dear boy.” My mother sadly shook her head over the past.</p>
			<p>“Ah, but at any rate,” I answered, “at any rate I was a Fabian. And I went for hearty long walks in the country. I drank my pint of Five <span epub:type="z3998:roman">X</span> at the Red Lion.”</p>
			<p>“I wish you could have gone without the beer,” said my mother. That I had not chosen to be a total abstainer had always a little distressed her. Moreover, I had a taste for beefsteaks.</p>
			<p>“It was my substitute for morris dancing, if you follow me.”</p>
			<p>But I don’t think she did follow me. We took two or three turns up and down the lawn in silence.</p>
			<p>“How is your paper doing?” she asked at last.</p>
			<p>I told her with a great show of enthusiasm about the cross between Angoras and Himalayans which we had just announced.</p>
			<p>“I often wish,” she said after a pause, “that you had accepted the college’s offer. It would have been so good to have you here, filling the place your dear father occupied.”</p>
			<p>She looked at me sadly. I smiled back at her as though from across a gulf. The child, I thought, grows up to forget that he is of the same flesh with his parents; but they do not forget. I wished, for her sake, that I were only five years old.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
