<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>V</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-4" id="chapter-4-5" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</h3>
			<p>“<i xml:lang="ett">An pris caruns flucuthukh</i>”; <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan beckoned to the guide. “Bring the lamp a little nearer,” he said in Italian, and when the light had been approached, he went on slowly spelling out the primitive Greek writing on the wall of the tomb: “<i xml:lang="ett">flucuthukh nun tithuial khues khathc anulis mulu vizile ziz riin puiian acasri flucuper pris an ti ar vus ta aius muntheri flucuthukh.</i>” He straightened himself up. “Charming language,” he said, “charming! Ever since I learned that the Etruscans used to call the god of wine Fufluns, I’ve taken the keenest interest in their language. Fufluns⁠—how incomparably more appropriate that is than Bacchus, or Liber, or Dionysos! Fufluns, <i xml:lang="ett">Fufluns</i>,” he repeated with delighted emphasis. “It couldn’t be better. They had a real linguistic genius, those creatures. What poets they must have produced! ‘When Fufluns <i xml:lang="ett">flucuthukhs</i> the <i xml:lang="ett">ziz</i>’⁠—one can imagine the odes in praise of wine which began like that. You couldn’t bring together eight such juicy, boozy syllables as that in English, could you?”</p>
			<p>“What about ‘Ale in a Saxon rumkin’ then?” suggested Chelifer.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan shook his head. “It doesn’t compare with the Etruscan,” he said. “There aren’t enough consonants. It’s too light, too fizzy and trivial. Why, you might be talking about soda water.”</p>
			<p>“But for all you know,” said Chelifer, “<i xml:lang="ett">flucuthukh</i> in Etruscan may mean soda water. Fufluns, I grant you, is apposite. But perhaps it was just a fluke. You have no evidence to show that they fitted sound to sense so aptly in other words. ‘When Fufluns <i xml:lang="ett">flucuthukhs</i> the <i xml:lang="ett">ziz</i>’ may be the translation of ‘When Bacchus drowns the hock with soda.’ You don’t know.”</p>
			<p>“You’re quite right,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan agreed. “I don’t. Nor does anyone else. My enthusiasm for Fufluns carried me away. <i xml:lang="ett">Flucuthukh</i> may not have the fruity connotation that a word with a sound like that ought to have; it may even, as you say, mean soda water. Still, I continue to hope for the best; I believe in my Etruscans. One day, when they find the key to this fossilized language, I believe I shall be justified; <i xml:lang="ett">flucuthukh</i> will turn out to be just as appropriate as Fufluns⁠—you mark my words! It’s a great language, I insist; a great language. Who knows? A couple of generations hence some new Busby or Keat may be drumming Etruscan syntax and Etruscan prosody into the backsides of British boyhood. Nothing would give me greater satisfaction. Latin and Greek have a certain infinitesimal practical value. But Etruscan is totally and absolutely useless. What better basis for a gentleman’s education could possibly be discovered? It’s the great dead language of the future. If Etruscan didn’t exist, it would be necessary to invent it.”</p>
			<p>“Which is precisely what the pedagogues will have to do,” said Chelifer, “there being no Etruscan literature beyond the inscriptions and the rigmarole on the mummy-wrappings at Agram.”</p>
			<p>“So much the better,” replied <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan. “If we wrote it ourselves, we might find Etruscan literature interesting. Etruscan literature composed by Etruscans would be as boring as any other ancient literature. But if the epics were written by you, the Socratic dialogues by me, the history by some master of fiction like Miss Thriplow⁠—then we’d possess a corpus in which the rare schoolboys who can derive some profit from their education could take a real interest. And when, a generation hence, we have become as much out of date in our ideas as Tully or Horace, the literature of Etruria will be rewritten by our descendants. Each generation will use the dead language to express its own ideas. And expressed in so rich an idiom as I take Etruscan to be, the ideas will seem the more significant and memorable. For I have often noticed that an idea which, expressed in one’s native language, would seem dull, commonplace and opaque, becomes transparent to the mind’s eye, takes on a new significance when given a foreign and unfamiliar embodiment. A cracker-motto in Latin sounds much weightier and truer than the same motto in English. Indeed, if the study of dead languages has any use at all, which I should be sorry to admit, it consists in teaching us the importance of the verbal medium in which thoughts are expressed. To know the same thing in several languages is to know it (if you have any sense at all) more profoundly, more richly, than if it were known only in one. The youth who learns that the god of wine is called, in Etruscan, Fufluns has a profounder knowledge of the attributes of that divine personality than the youth who only knows him under the name of Bacchus. If I desire that archaeologists should discover the key to the Etruscan language, it is merely in order that I may have a deeper insight into the thing or idea connoted by such sumptuous words as <i xml:lang="ett">flucuthukh</i> or <i xml:lang="ett">khathc</i>. For the rest I care nothing. That they should discover the meaning of these inscriptions is a matter to me of the most complete indifference. For after all, what would they discover? Nothing that we don’t already know. They would discover that before the Romans conquered Italy men ate and drank, made love, piled up wealth, oppressed their weaker neighbours, diverted themselves with sports, made laws and so on. One could have divined as much by walking down Piccadilly any day of the week. And besides, we have their pictures.” He threw out his hand. The guide, who had been listening patiently to the incomprehensible discourse, responded to the gesture by raising his acetylene lamp. Called magically into existence by the bright white light, a crowd of gaily coloured forms appeared on the walls of the vault in which they were standing. Set in a frame of conventionalized trees, a pair of red-brown wrestlers with Egyptian eyes and the profiles of the Greeks who disport themselves round the flanks of the earliest vases were feeling for a hold. On either side of them, beyond the trees, stood two couples of long-legged black horses. Above them, in the segment of a circle between the upper line of this band of paintings and the vaulted roof, a great leopard lay couchant, white-skinned, with a pattern of black spots arranged like those on the china dogs and cats of a later age. On the wall to the left they were feasting: red-brown Etruscans reclined on couches; porcelain-white women, contrasting as voluptuously with their tanned companions as the pale, plump nymphs of Boucher with their brown pastoral lovers, sat by their sides. With hieratic gestures of mutual love they pledged one another in bowls of wine. On the opposite wall the fowlers were busy⁠—here with slings, there with nets. The sky was alive with birds. In the blue sea below they were spearing fish. A long inscription ran from right to left across the wall. The vaulted roof was painted with chequers, red, black and white. Over the low, narrow door that led from the tomb into the antechamber there knelt a benevolent white bull. Two thousand five hundred years ago they had wept here over the newly dead.</p>
			<p>“You see them,” continued <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan, “hunting, drinking, playing, making love. What else could you expect them to do? This writing will tell us no more than we know already. True, I want to know what it means, but only because I hope that the brown man may be saying to the white lady: ‘<i xml:lang="ett">Flucuthukh</i> to me only with thine eyes,’ or words to that effect, ‘and I will <i xml:lang="ett">flucuthukh</i> with mine.’ If that was what they really were saying, it would throw an entirely new light on the notion of drinking. An entirely new light.”</p>
			<p>“It would throw no new light on love, if lovers they are,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Aldwinkle mournfully.</p>
			<p>“Wouldn’t it?” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan queried. “But imagine if <i xml:lang="ett">flucuthukh</i> turned out to mean, not drink, but love. I assure you that the feelings denoted by such a word would be quite different from those we sum up by ‘love.’ You can make a good guess from the sound of the word in any language what the people who speak it mean when they talk of love. <i xml:lang="fr">Amour</i>, for example⁠—that long <i epub:type="z3998:phoneme">ou</i> sound with the rolled <i epub:type="z3998:phoneme">r</i> at the end of it, how significant it is! <i epub:type="z3998:phoneme">Ou</i>⁠—you have to push your lips into a snout-like formation, as though you were going to kiss. Then, briskly, <i epub:type="z3998:phoneme">rrr</i>⁠—you growl like a dog. Could anything be more perfectly expressive of the matter-of-fact lasciviousness which passes for love in nine-tenths of French fiction and drama? And <i xml:lang="de">Liebe</i>⁠—what a languishing, moonlit, sentimental sound the long <i epub:type="z3998:phoneme">ie</i> has! And how apt, too, is the bleating labial by which it is followed!⁠—<i epub:type="z3998:phoneme">be</i>⁠—<i epub:type="z3998:phoneme">be</i>. It is a sheep whose voice is choked by emotion. All German romanticism is implied in the sound of the word. And German romanticism, a little <i xml:lang="fr">détraqué</i>, turns quite logically into expressionismus and the wild erotic extravagance of contemporary German fiction. As for our <em>love</em>⁠—that’s characteristically noncommittal and diffident. That dim little monosyllable illustrates our English reluctance to call a spade a spade. It is the symbol of our national repressions. All our hypocrisy and all the beautiful platonism of our poetry is there. Love⁠ ⁠…” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan whispered the word, and holding up his finger for silence cocked his ear to catch the faint echoes of his voice reverberating from wall to wall under the sepulchral vault. “Love.⁠ ⁠… How utterly different is our English emotion from that connoted by <i xml:lang="it">amore</i>! <i xml:lang="it">Amore</i>⁠—you fairly sing the second syllable, in a baritone voice, from the chest, with a little throaty tremolo on the surface to make it sound more palpitating. <i xml:lang="it">Amore</i>⁠—it’s the name of the quality that Stendhal so much admired in the Italians and the absence of which in his own countrymen, and more especially countrywomen, made him rank Paris below Milan or Rome⁠—it’s the apt and perfectly expressive name of passion.”</p>
			<p>“How true!” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Aldwinkle, brightening for a moment through her gloom. This compliment to her Italian language and Italian character touched and pleased her. “The very sound of <i xml:lang="it">amore</i> is passionate. If the English knew what passion meant, they’d have found a more expressive word than love. That’s certain. But they don’t know.” She sighed.</p>
			<p>“Quite so,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan. “<i xml:lang="it">Amore</i>, we see, can mean nothing else than Southern passion. But now, suppose that <i xml:lang="ett">flucuthukh</i> should turn out to be the Etruscan for ‘love’⁠—what then? <i xml:lang="it">Amour</i> connotes lasciviousness, <i xml:lang="de">Liebe</i> sentiment, <i xml:lang="it">amore</i> passion. To what aspect of the complex phenomenon of love can <i xml:lang="ett">flucuthukh</i> refer? The microbe <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Staphylococcus pyogenes</i> produces in some patients boils, in others sties in the eye; in certain cases it is even responsible for <i xml:lang="la">keratitis punctata</i>. It is the same with love. The symptoms vary in different individuals. But owing to the boundless suggestibility and imitativeness of man, the commonest symptoms at any given period tend to become universal in any one society. Whole peoples take the disease in the same way; one suffers from <i xml:lang="la">amour</i>, another from <i xml:lang="de">Liebe</i> and so on. But now imagine a people to whom love was <i xml:lang="ett">flucuthukh</i>. What can have been the particular symptoms of the general amorous disease to which such a name was given? One cannot guess. But at least it is fascinating to speculate.”</p>
			<p>One after the other the party filed out through the narrow door into the anteroom of the sepulchre and up the steep flight of steps leading to the surface of the ground. Blinking in the bright afternoon light, they stepped out on to the bare and windy down.</p>
			<p>It was a solitary place. The arches of a ruined aqueduct went striding along the ridge, and following their long recession the eye came at last to rest on the walls and tall towers of Corneto. To the left the hog-backed down sloped seawards; on the further side of the narrow plain at its foot stretched the Mediterranean. On the right lay a deep valley, shut in on the further side by a great round hill. Its grassy flanks were furrowed and pitted with what had once been the works of man. Once, on that hill, had stood the sacred city, Tarquinii of the Etruscans. The long bare down on which they were standing had been, through how many centuries? its necropolis. In little houses hollowed out of the chalky stone slept the innumerable dead. Here and there the top of a vault was broken through; from the hollow darkness within came up even at high summer an immemorial coolness. Here and there the surface of the down swelled up into round grass-grown barrows. It was from the heart of one of these tumuli that they had now emerged. The guide put out his lamp and shut the door upon the Etruscan ghosts. They walked for a few hundred yards through geological time⁠—between the sea and the hills, under the floating clouds; on the skyline the Middle Ages pricked up their towers; the smudged and flattened relics of Etruria undulated almost imperceptibly under the grass; from the Roman road in the plain below came up the distant hooting of a motor car.</p>
			<p>The sound of the motor horn aroused Irene from the thoughtful trance in which, sad-faced and childish, this time, pathetically, she was walking. She had been silent and melancholy ever since, yesterday morning, they had left Rome; Lord Hovenden had stayed behind with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Falx. The long-drawn hooting of the electric horn seemed to remind her of something. She looked down towards the seaboard plain. A cloud of white dust was advancing along the Maremman road from the direction of Civita Vecchia. It hung, opaque, over half a mile of road, fading slowly to transparency towards the tail. At the head, where the dust was thickest, a small black object moved like a rapidly crawling insect across the map-like expanse of plain, drawing the cloud after it. From the opposite direction came another black-headed comet of dust. Like two white serpents they approached one another, as though rushing to battle. Nearer, nearer they came. Irene stopped still to look at them. She was filled with a horrible apprehension. It seemed impossible that they should not crash together. Nearer, nearer. The heads of the two serpents seemed almost to be touching one another. Suppose, just suppose that one of the cars was his.⁠ ⁠… Inevitably they must collide. Crash and smash⁠—oh, the horror of it! Irene shut her eyes. A few seconds later she opened them. The two white snakes had merged together into one very thick opaque snake. It was impossible to see the little black heads at all. For one horrible moment she thought that they must have destroyed one another. But they reappeared after a little, receding now one from the other, no more approaching. The two serpents were still one serpent, but two-headed, a long amphisbaena. Then, gradually, the middle of the amphisbaena began to grow thin, to fade; a little clump of trees showed through it, dimly at first, mistily, then clearly. The amphisbaena had fallen in half and the two white snakes crawled on, one northwards, the other towards the south, and between their fading tails was a wide and ever wider gap. Irene heaved a deep sigh of relief and ran on after the others. It seemed to her that she had been the witness of a catastrophe miraculously averted. She felt much happier than she had felt all day. On a wide road two automobiles had passed one another. That was all.</p>
			<p>The guide was unlocking the door that gave entrance to another excavated barrow. He relit his lamp and led the way down the steep steps into the tomb. On one wall they were horse-racing and wrestling, hieratically, all in profile. A goddess⁠—or perhaps it was merely the Lady Mayoress of the city⁠—wearing that high bonnet-shaped coiffure which the Roman matrons were afterwards to borrow from their neighbours, was distributing the prizes. On the other walls they were feasting. The red-brown men, the white-skinned ladies reclined along their couches. A musician stood by, playing on his double flute, and a female dancer, dressed in what looked rather like a Persian costume, was dancing a shawl dance for the diversion of the diners.</p>
			<p>“They seem to have had simple tastes,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan. “There’s nothing very sophisticated or <i xml:lang="fr">fin de siècle</i> here⁠—no bull-baiting by naked female acrobats, as at Cnossos; no gladiatorial fights, no wholesale butchering of animals, no boring matches with brass knuckle-dusters, as in the Roman arenas. A nice school-boyish sort of people, it looks to me. Not quite civilized enough to be <em>exigeant</em> about their pleasures.”</p>
			<p>“And not yet quite civilized enough,” added Chelifer, “to be really vulgar. In that respect they fall a long way behind the later Romans. Do you know that huge mosaic in the Lateran museum? It comes from one of the Imperial baths, I forget which, and consists of portraits of the principal sporting heroes of the epoch⁠—boxers and wrestlers⁠—with their trainers and backers. These last are treated very respectfully by the mosaic-maker, who represents them wearing togas and standing in the noblest attitudes. One sees at a glance that they are the <i xml:lang="fr">gens bien</i>, the sportsmen, the amateurs⁠—in a word, the monied interest. The athletes are portrayed in a state of nature, and are indeed so excessively natural that one could easily mistake the heavyweight boxers for gorillas peeled of their superfluous hair. Under each portrait is a caption with the name of the hero represented. The whole thing reminds one very much of the sporting page in a picture paper⁠—only it is a page that is forty feet long by thirty wide, and made, not of wood-pulp, but of the most durable materials ever devised by the ingenuity of man for the embodiment and visible eternization of his thoughts. And it is, I think, precisely the size and everlastingness of the frightful thing that makes it so much worse than the similar page from our picture papers. To make ephemeral heroes of professional sportsmen and prizefighters is bad enough; but that a people should desire to immortalize their fame is surely indicative of a profounder vulgarity and abjection. Like the Roman mob, the mobs of our modern capitals delight in sports and exercises which they themselves do not practise; but at any rate, the fame of our professionals lasts only a day after their triumph. We do not print their effigies on marble pavements made to live down a hundred generations of men. We print them on wood-pulp, which is much the same as printing them on water. It is comforting to think that by the year two thousand one hundred the whole of contemporary journalism, literature and thought will have crumbled to dust. The mosaic, however, will still be in its present state of perfect preservation. Nothing short of dynamite or an earthquake will ever totally destroy the effigies of those Imperial boxers. And a very good thing, too, for the future historians of Rome. For no man can claim that he has really understood the Roman empire till he has studied that mosaic. That pavement is a vessel filled with the quintessence of Roman reality. A drop of that reality is enough to shrivel up all the retrospective Utopias that historians have ever made or ever can make out of the chronicles of ancient Rome. After looking at that mosaic a man can have no more generous illusions about the people who admired it or the age in which it was made. He will realize that Roman civilization was not merely just as sordid as ours, but if anything more sordid. But in these Etruscan vaults,” Chelifer added, looking round at the frescoed walls, “one gets no such impression of organized and efficient beastliness as one gets from the Roman mosaic. There’s a freshness, as you say, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan, a certain jolly schoolboyishness about all the fun they represent. But I have no doubt, of course, that the impression is entirely fallacious. Their art has a certain archaic charm; but the artists were probably quite as sophisticated and quite as repulsive as their Roman successors.”</p>
			<p>“Come, come,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan, “you forget that they called Bacchus Fufluns. Give them at least the credit that is due to them.”</p>
			<p>“But the Romans too had a fine language,” Chelifer objected. “And yet they laid down immense enlargements of the sporting page of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Daily Sketch</i> in marble tesserae on a foundation of cement.”</p>
			<p>They climbed again towards the light. The steps were so high and her legs so short that Miss Elver had to be helped up. The tomb resounded with her laughter and shrill whooping. They emerged at last out of the ground.</p>
			<p>On the top of a high barrow some two or three hundred yards away stood the figure of a man, distinct against the sky. He was shading his eyes with his hand and seemed to be looking for something. Irene suddenly became very red.</p>
			<p>“Why, I believe it’s Hovenden,” she said in a voice that was as casual as she could make it.</p>
			<p>Almost simultaneously the man turned his face in their direction. The shading hand went up in a gesture of greeting. A glad “Hullo!” sounded across the tombs; the man skipped down from his barrow and came running across the down towards them. And Hovenden it was; Irene had seen aright.</p>
			<p>“Been looking for you all over ve place,” he explained breathlessly as he came up. With the greatest heartiness he shook the hands of all present except⁠—diplomatically⁠—Irene’s. “Vey told me in ve town vat a party of foreigners was out here looking at ve cemetery or somefing. So I buzzed after you till I saw old Ernest wiv ve car at ve side of ve road. Been underground, have you?” He looked into the dark entrance of the tomb. “No wonder I couldn’t⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Aldwinkle cut him short. “But why aren’t you in Rome with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Falx?” she asked.</p>
			<p>Lord Hovenden’s boyish, freckled face became all at once exceedingly red. “Ve fact is,” he said, looking at the ground, “vat I didn’t feel very well. Ve doctor said I ought to get away from Rome at once. Country air, you know. So I just left a note for <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Falx and⁠ ⁠… and here I am.” He looked up again, smiling.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
