<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>III</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-1" id="chapter-1-3" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</h3>
			<p>Dinner was served in the Saloon of the Ancestors. In <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Aldwinkle’s enthusiastic imagination what marvellous symposia had been held within those walls⁠—centuries even before they were built⁠—what intellectual feasts! Aquinas, here, had confided to an early Malaspina his secret doubt on the predictability of rollations, had twitted the robber marquess, over a goblet of wine, with the feebleness of his synderesis. Dante had insisted on the advantages of having a Platonic mistress whom one never met and who could, when necessary, be identified with Theology. Peter of Picardy, meanwhile, on his way to Rome had recited from his rhymed version of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Physiologus</i> the lines on the Hyaena, a beast which, besides being an hermaphrodite, carries in its eye a stone which, held by a man in his mouth, permits him to see the future; it symbolizes moreover avarice and lasciviousness. Learned Boccaccio had discoursed on the genealogy of the gods. Pico della Mirandola, over the boar’s head, quoted the kabbala in support of the doctrine of the Trinity. Michelangelo had expounded his plans for the façade of San Lorenzo in Florence. Galileo had speculated why it is only up to thirty-two feet that Nature abhors a vacuum. Marini had astonished with his conceits. Luca Giordano, for a wager, had painted, between the roast and the dessert, a full-sized picture of Hannibal crossing the Alps.⁠ ⁠… And then, what brilliant ladies heightened the lustre of these feasts! Lovely, perennially young, accomplished as the protagonists of Castiglione’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Courtier</i>, amorous in the extreme⁠—they inspired the men of genius to yet higher flights, they capped their hardiest sallies with a word of feminine grace.</p>
			<p>It had been <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Aldwinkle’s ambition, ever since she bought the palace, to revive these ancient glories. She saw herself, unofficially a princess, surrounded by a court of poets, philosophers and artists. Beautiful women should swim through the great saloons and the gardens, glowing with love for the men of genius. And periodically⁠—for the apartment of the dwarfs, which the Cybo Malaspina, in imitation of the Gonzaga, had included in their palace, demanded appropriate inhabitants to furnish it⁠—periodically they should bring forth, painlessly, children to the men of genius⁠—all curly-headed, fully toothed and two years old on the day of birth, and all infant prodigies. Rows of little Mozarts. In a word, the palace of Vezza should re-become what it had never been except in <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Aldwinkle’s fancy.</p>
			<p>What it had been in fact one could only guess by looking at the faces of the Ancestors who gave the banqueting-hall its name.</p>
			<p>From circular niches set high in the walls of the huge square room the lords of Massa Carrara looked out, bust after bust, across the intervening centuries. Right round the room they went, beginning on the left of the fireplace and ending, with the penultimate Cybo Malaspina, who arranged the room, on the right. And as marquess succeeded marquess and prince, prince, an expression of ever profounder imbecility made itself apparent on the faces of the Ancestors. The vulture’s nose, the formidable jaw of the first robber marquess transformed themselves by gradual degrees into the vague proboscides of anteaters, into criminally prognathous deformities. The foreheads grew lower with every generation, the marble eyes stared ever blanklier and the look of conscious pride became more and more strongly marked on every countenance. It was the boast of the Cybo Malaspina that they had never married beneath them and that their heirs had always been legitimate. One had only to look at the faces of the last three Princes to feel sure that the boast was amply justified. Were these the Muses’ friends?</p>
			<p>“You can imagine the splendour of the scene,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Aldwinkle rapturously as she entered the Saloon of the Ancestors on Calamy’s arm. “The innumerable candles, the silks, the jewels. And all the crowd manoeuvring in the most stately manner according to the rules of etiquette.” The last representative, albeit adoptive, of these gorgeous beings, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Aldwinkle lifted her head still higher and with a still more swelling port sailed across the huge room towards the little table where, in shrunken splendour, the successors of Cybo Malaspina were to dine. The train of her coral-coloured velvet dress rustled after her.</p>
			<p>“It must have been very fine,” Calamy agreed. “Certainly, from the point of view of picturesqueness, we’ve lost by the passing of etiquette. One wonders how much further informality will go. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Gladstone, in his old age, paid a visit to Oxford and was horrified to observe the new fashions in undergraduates’ dress. In his young days every young man who respected himself had at least one pair of trousers in which he never sat down for fear of making them bag at the knees, while the outfit in which he normally walked about the streets was never worth less than seventy or eighty pounds. And yet, in the time of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Gladstone’s visit, the undergraduates still wore stiff collars and bowler hats. What would he have said if he could have seen them now? And what shall we say fifty years hence?”</p>
			<p>The company disposed itself round the table. Calamy, as the new arrival, occupied the place of honour on <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Aldwinkle’s right.</p>
			<p>“You’ve broached a very interesting subject,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan, who sat opposite him, on their hostess’s left. “Very interesting,” he repeated, as he unfolded his napkin. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan was a middle-sized, thickly built man. The upper hem of his trousers followed an ample geodesic; his shoulders were very broad, his neck short and powerful. The red face looked tough and knobbly like the head of a cudgel. It was an enigmatic and equivocal face, whose normal expression was at once gross and sensitively refined, serious and sly. The mouth was small and its thin lips fitted tightly together, as though they were the moving parts of a very well made piece of furniture. The line that marked the meeting of the lips was almost straight, but at one end its horizontal gravity was deflected a trifle downwards, so that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan seemed to be forever in process of suppressing a wry smile that was forever importunately troubling his demureness. The hair was smooth, silvery and saintly. The nose was short and straight, like a lion’s⁠—but a lion’s that had become, with time and good living, rather bottled. Looking out from the midst of a web-work of fine wrinkles, the eyes were small, but bright and very blue. As the result, perhaps, of an illness⁠—or perhaps it was merely under the weight of five-and-sixty years⁠—one white eyebrow had settled down permanently lower than the other. From the right side of his face <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan looked at you mysteriously and confidentially through the gap in a kind of chronic wink. But from the left the glance was supercilious and aristocratic, as though the western socket had been stretched by an invisible monocle a size or so too large for it. An expression of benevolence mingled with malice shone in his glance while he was talking; and when he laughed, every polished red facet of his cudgel’s face twinkled with mirth, as though suddenly illumined from within. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan was neither a poet nor a philosopher; nor of a remarkably brilliant family; but <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Aldwinkle, who had known him intimately for many years, justified his inclusion among her courtiers on the ground that he was one of the obscure Great: potentially anything he chose to be, but actually, through indolence, unknown.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan took a couple of spoonfuls of soup before proceeding. “A very interesting subject,” he repeated yet again. He had a melodious voice, ripe, round, fruity and powdered, as it were, with a bloom of huskiness⁠—the faint hoarseness of those who have drunk well, eaten well and copiously made love. “Formality, external pomp, etiquette⁠—their practical disappearance from modern life is really a most extraordinary thing, when you come to think of it. Formality and pomp were one of the essential features of ancient government. Tyranny tempered by transformation scenes⁠—that was the formula of all governments in the seventeenth century, particularly in Italy. Provided you treated your people to a procession or some similarly spectacular function once a month or thereabouts, you could do whatever you pleased. It was the papal method <i xml:lang="fr">par excellence</i>. But it was imitated by every grand seigneur, down to the most piddling little count in the peninsula. Look how all the architecture of the period is conditioned by the need for display. The architect was there to make backgrounds for the incessant amateur theatricals of his employers. Huge vistas of communicating saloons to march down, avenues for processions, vast flights of steps to do the Grand Monarch descent from the skies. No comfort⁠—since comfort is only private⁠—but an immense amount of splendour to impress the spectator from outside. Napoleon was the last ruler to practise it systematically and scientifically on the grand scale. Those reviews, those triumphal entries and exits, those coronations and weddings and christenings, all those carefully prepared stage effects⁠—why, they were half his secret. And now these pomps are no more. Are our rulers so stupid and so regardless of the lessons of history that they neglect these aids to government? Or can it be that tastes have changed, that the public no longer demands these shows and is no longer impressed by them? I put the question to our political friends.” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan leaned forward, and looking past Miss Thriplow, who sat on his left, smiled at the young man who sat beyond her and at the older man occupying the corresponding place on the opposite side of the table, next to Irene Aldwinkle.</p>
			<p>The young man, who looked even younger than he really was⁠—and at best it was only two or three months since Lord Hovenden had attained his majority⁠—smiled amiably at <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan and shook his head, then turned hopefully to the person who sat opposite him. “Ask me anover,” he said. Lord Hovenden still found it difficult to pronounce a <i epub:type="z3998:phoneme">th</i>. “What do you say, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Falx?” An expression of respectful attention appeared on his boyish, freckled face as he waited for <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Falx’s answer. Whatever the answer might be, it was obvious that Lord Hovenden would regard it as oracular. He admired, he revered <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Falx.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Falx, indeed, invited admiration and respect. With his white beard, his long and curly white hair, his large dark liquid eyes, his smooth broad forehead and aquiline nose, he had the air of a minor prophet. Nor were appearances deceptive. In another age, in other surroundings, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Falx would in all probability have been a minor prophet: a denouncer, a mouthpiece of the Lord, a caller to salvation, a threatener of wrath to come. Having been born in the middle of the nineteenth century and having passed the years of his early manhood in the profession which, between three and seven, every male child desires to embrace⁠—that of the engine driver⁠—he had become not exactly a prophet, but a Labour leader.</p>
			<p>Lord Hovenden, whose claim to figure in <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Aldwinkle’s court was the fact that she had known him since he was a baby, that he was descended from Simon de Montfort, and that he was immensely rich, had added a further merit: he had become an ardent Guild Socialist. An earnest young schoolmaster had first apprised him of the fact⁠—hitherto but very imperfectly realized by Lord Hovenden⁠—that there are a great many poor people whose lives are extremely disagreeable and arduous and who, if justice were done, would be better off than they are at present. His generous impulses were stirred. Youthfully, he desired to precipitate an immediate millennium. Perhaps, too, a certain egotistical ambition to distinguish himself above his fellows had something to do with his enthusiasm. Among persons born in privileged positions and in the midst of wealth, snobbery often takes a form rather different from that which it commonly assumes. Not always, indeed; for there are plenty of rich and titled persons who regard wealth and title with the same abject respect as is shown by those whose acquaintance with the nobility and the plutocracy is only in fiction and the pages of the weekly papers. But others, whose ambition it is to climb out of the familiar surroundings into, at any rate intellectually, higher spheres, become infected with a passionate snobbery in regard to the artistic or political world. This snobbery⁠—the snobbery of blood towards brain⁠—had mingled without his being conscious of it with Lord Hovenden’s purely humanitarian ardour, and had given it added strength. Lord Hovenden’s pleasure at being introduced to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Falx had been enormous, and the thought that he alone, of all his friends and relations, enjoyed the privilege of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Falx’s acquaintance, that he alone was free of the exciting political world in which <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Falx lived, had made him more than ever enthusiastic in the cause of justice. There had been occasions, however⁠—and they had become more frequent of late⁠—when Lord Hovenden had found that the demands made on him by a strenuous social life left him very little time for <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Falx or Guild Socialism. For one who danced as long and often as he did it was difficult to pay much attention to anything else. In lulls between the merrymaking he remembered with shame that he had not done his duty by his principles. It was to make up for arrears in enthusiasm that he had cut short his grouse shooting to accompany <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Falx to an International Labour Conference in Rome. The conference was to be held towards the end of September; but Lord Hovenden had sacrificed a month’s more shooting than was necessary by suggesting that, before the conference, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Falx and he should go to stay for a few weeks with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Aldwinkle. “Come when you like and bring whom you like.” Those were the words of Lilian’s invitation. He telegraphed to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Aldwinkle to say that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Falx needed a holiday and that he proposed to bring him; <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Aldwinkle replied that she would be delighted to have him. There they were.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Falx paused for a moment before answering <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan’s question. He turned his bright dark eyes round the table, as though collecting everybody’s attention; then spoke in the penetrating musical voice that had stirred so many audiences to enthusiasm. “Twentieth-century rulers,” he said, “respect the educated democracy too much to try to bamboozle it and keep it falsely contented by mere shows. Democracies demand reason.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, come,” protested <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan. “What about <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Bryan’s agitation against Evolution?”</p>
			<p>“Moreover,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Falx went on, ignoring the point, “we in the twentieth century have outgrown that sort of thing.”</p>
			<p>“Perhaps we have,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan. “Though I can’t imagine how we should have. Opinions change, of course, but the love of a show isn’t an opinion. It’s founded on something deeper, something which has no business to change.” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan shook his head. “It reminds me,” he went on after a little pause, “of another, similarly deep-rooted change that I can never account for: the change in our susceptibility to flattery. It’s impossible to read any ancient moralist without finding copious warnings against flatterers. ‘A flattering mouth worketh ruin’⁠—it’s in the Bible. And the reward of the flatterer is also specified there. ‘He that speaketh flattery to his friends, even the eyes of his children shall fail’⁠—though one would have thought that the vicariousness of the threatened punishment rendered it a little less formidable. But at any rate, in ancient days the great and the prosperous seem to have been fairly at the mercy of flatterers. And they laid it on so thick, they did their job, from all accounts, so extremely coarsely! Can it be that the educated plutocracy of those days was really taken in by that sort of thing? It wouldn’t be now. The flattery would have to be a great deal more subtle nowadays to produce the same effect. Moreover, I never find in the works of the modern moralists any warnings against flatterers. There’s been some sort of change; though how it has come about, I really don’t quite know.”</p>
			<p>“Perhaps there has been a moral progress,” suggested <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Falx.</p>
			<p>Lord Hovenden turned his eyes from <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Falx’s face, on which, while he was speaking, they had been reverently fixed, and smiled at <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan with an air of inquiring triumph that seemed to ask whether he had any answer to make to that.</p>
			<p>“Perhaps,” repeated <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan, rather dubiously.</p>
			<p>Calamy suggested another reason. “It’s surely due,” he said, “to the change in the position of the great and the prosperous. In the past they regarded themselves and were regarded by others as being what they were by divine right. Consequently, the grossest flattery seemed to them only their due. But now the right to be a prince or a millionaire seems a little less divine than it did. Flattery which once seemed only an expression of proper respect now sounds excessive; and what in the past was felt to be almost sincere is now regarded as ironical.”</p>
			<p>“I think you may be right,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan. “One result, at any rate, of this slump in flattery has been a great alteration in the technique of the parasite.”</p>
			<p>“Has the technique of the parasite ever altered?” asked <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Falx. Lord Hovenden passed on his question to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan in an interrogating smile. “Hasn’t he always been the same⁠—living on the labours of society without contributing to the common stock?”</p>
			<p>“We are speaking of different sorts of parasites,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan explained, twinkling genially at the minor prophet. “Your parasites are the idle rich; mine are the idle poor who live on the idle rich. Big fleas have little fleas; I was referring to the tapeworms of tapeworms. A most interesting class, I assure you; and one that has never really had its due from the natural historians of humanity. True, there’s Lucian’s great work on the art of being a parasite, and a very fine work too; but a little out of date, particularly where flattery is concerned. Better than Lucian is Diderot. But the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Neveu de Rameau</i> deals with only a single type of parasite, and that not the most successful or the most worthy of imitation. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Skimpole in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Bleak House</i> isn’t bad. But he lacks subtlety; he’s not a perfect model for the budding tapeworm. The fact is that no writer, so far as I’m aware, has really gone into the question of parasites. I feel their remissness,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan added, twinkling first at <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Aldwinkle, then round the table at her guests, “almost as a personal affront. Professing as I do⁠—or perhaps trying to profess would be a more accurate description⁠—the parasitical mystery, I regard this conspiracy of silence as most insulting.”</p>
			<p>“How absurd you are,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Aldwinkle. The complacent references to his own moral defects and weaknesses were frequent in <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan’s conversation. To disarm criticism by himself forestalling it, to shock and embarrass those susceptible of embarrassment, to air his own freedom from the common prejudices by lightly owning to defects which others would desire to conceal⁠—it was to achieve these ends that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan so cheerfully gave himself away. “Absurd!” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Aldwinkle repeated.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan shook his head. “Not at all absurd,” he said. “I’m only telling the truth. For alas, it is true that I’ve never really been a successful parasite. I could have been a pretty effective flatterer; but unfortunately I happen to live in an age when flattery doesn’t work. I might have made a tolerably good buffoon, if I were a little stupider and a little more high-spirited. But even if I could have been a buffoon, I should certainly have thought twice before taking up that branch of parasitism. It’s dangerous being a court fool, it’s most precarious. You may please for a time; but in the end you either bore or offend your patrons. Diderot’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Neveu de Rameau</i> is the greatest literary specimen of the type; you know what a wretched sort of life he led. No, your permanently successful parasite, at any rate in modern times, belongs to an entirely different type⁠—a type, alas, to which by no possible ingenuity could I make myself conform.”</p>
			<p>“I should hope not,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Aldwinkle, standing up for <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan’s Better Self.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan bowed his acknowledgments and continued. “All the really successful parasites I have come across recently belong to the same species,” he said. “They’re quiet, they’re gentle, they’re rather pathetic. They appeal to the protective maternal instincts. They generally have some charming talent⁠—never appreciated by the gross world, but recognized by the patron, vastly to his credit of course; (that flattery’s most delicate). They never offend, like the buffoon; they don’t obtrude themselves, but gaze with doglike eyes; they can render themselves, when their presence would be tiresome, practically nonexistent. The protection of them satisfies the love of dominion and the altruistic parental instinct that prompts us to befriend the weak. You could write at length about all this,” went on <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan, turning to Miss Thriplow. “You could make a big deep book out of it. I should have done it myself, if I had been an author; and but for the grace of God, I might have been. I give you the suggestion.”</p>
			<p>In words of one syllable Miss Thriplow thanked him. She had been very mousey all through dinner. After all the risks she had run this afternoon, the floaters she had stood on the brink of, she thought it best to sit quiet and look as simple and genuine as possible. A few slight alterations in her toilet before dinner had made all the difference. She had begun by taking off the pearl necklace and even, in spite of the chastity of its design, the emerald ring. That’s better, she had said to herself as she looked at the obscure little person in the simple black frock⁠—without a jewel, and the hands so white and frail, the face so pale and smooth⁠—who stood opposite her in the looking-glass. “How frankly and innocently she looks at you with those big brown eyes!” She could imagine Calamy saying that to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan; but what <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan would answer she couldn’t quite guess; he was such a cynic. Opening a drawer, she had pulled out a black silk shawl⁠—not the Venetian one with the long fringes, but the much less romantic bourgeois, English shawl that had belonged to her mother. She draped it over her shoulders and with her two hands drew it together across her bosom. In the pier glass she seemed almost a nun; or better still, she thought, a little girl in a convent school⁠—one of a hundred black-uniformed couples, with lace-frilled pantalettes coming down over their ankles, walking in a long, long crocodile, graded from five foot eight at the head to four foot nothing at the tail. But if she looped the thing up, hood fashion, over her head, she’d be still more obscure, still poorer and honester⁠—she’d be a factory girl, click-clicking along on her clogs to the cotton mill. But perhaps that would be carrying things a little too far. After all, she wasn’t a Lancashire lass. Awfully cultured, but not spoilt; clever, but simple and genuine. That was what she was. In the end she had come down to dinner with the black shawl drawn very tightly round her shoulders. Very small and mousey. The head girl in the convent school had all the accomplishments; but, for the present, wouldn’t speak unless she were spoken to. Modestly, then, demurely, she thanked him.</p>
			<p>“Meanwhile,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan continued, “the sad fact remains that I have never succeeded in persuading anybody to become completely responsible for me. True, I’ve eaten quintals of other people’s food, drunk hectolitres of their liquor”⁠—he raised his glass and looking over the top of it at his hostess, emptied it to her health⁠—“for which I’m exceedingly grateful. But I’ve never contrived to live permanently at their expense. Nor have they, for their part, shown the slightest sign of wanting to take me forever to themselves. Mine’s not the right sort of character, alas. I’m not pathetic. I’ve never struck the ladies as being particularly in need of maternal ministrations. Indeed, if I ever had any success with them⁠—I trust I may say so without fatuity⁠—it was due to my strength rather than to my feebleness. At sixty-six, however⁠ ⁠…” He shook his head sadly. “And yet one doesn’t, by compensation, become any the more pathetic.”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Falx, whose moral ideas were simple and orthodox, shook his head; he didn’t like this sort of thing. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan, moreover, puzzled him. “Well,” he pronounced, “all that I can say is this: when we’ve been in power for a little there won’t be any parasites of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan’s kind for the simple reason that there won’t be any parasites of any kind. They’ll all be doing their bit.”</p>
			<p>“Luckily,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan, helping himself again to the mixed fry, “I shall be dead by that time. I couldn’t face the world after <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Falx’s friends have dosed it with Keating’s and vermifuge. Ah, all you young people,” he went on, turning to Miss Thriplow, “what a fearful mistake you made, being born when you were!”</p>
			<p>“I wouldn’t change,” said Miss Thriplow.</p>
			<p>“Nor would I,” Calamy agreed.</p>
			<p>“Nor I,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Aldwinkle echoed, ardently associating herself with the party of youth. She felt as young as they did. Younger indeed; for having been young when the world was younger, she had the thoughts and the feelings of a generation that had grown up placidly in sheltered surroundings⁠—or perhaps had not grown up at all. The circumstances which had so violently and unnaturally matured her juniors had left her, stiffened as she already was by time into a definite mould, unchanged. Spiritually, they were older than she.</p>
			<p>“I don’t see that it would be possible to live in a more exciting age,” said Calamy. “The sense that everything’s perfectly provisional and temporary⁠—everything, from social institutions to what we’ve hitherto regarded as the most sacred scientific truths⁠—the feeling that nothing, from the Treaty of Versailles to the rationally explicable universe, is really safe, the intimate conviction that anything may happen, anything may be discovered⁠—another war, the artificial creation of life, the proof of continued existence after death⁠—why, it’s all infinitely exhilarating.”</p>
			<p>“And the possibility that everything may be destroyed?” questioned <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan.</p>
			<p>“That’s exhilarating too,” Calamy answered, smiling.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan shook his head. “It may be rather tame of me,” he said, “but I confess, I prefer a more quiet life. I persist that you made a mistake in so timing your entry into the world that the period of your youth coincided with the war and your early maturity with this horribly insecure and unprosperous peace. How incomparably better I managed my existence! I made my entry in the late fifties⁠—almost a twin to <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Origin of Species</i>.⁠ ⁠… I was brought up in the simple faith of nineteenth-century materialism; a faith untroubled by doubts and as yet unsophisticated by that disquieting scientific modernism which is now turning the staunchest mathematical physicists into mystics. We were all wonderfully optimistic then; believed in progress and the ultimate explicability of everything in terms of physics and chemistry, believed in <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Gladstone and our own moral and intellectual superiority over every other age. And no wonder. For we were growing richer and richer every day. The lower classes, whom it was still permissible to call by that delightful name, were still respectful, and the prospect of revolution was still exceedingly remote. True, we were at the same time becoming faintly but uncomfortably aware that these lower classes led a rather disagreeable life, and that perhaps the economic laws were not quite so unalterable by human agency as <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Buckle had so comfortingly supposed. And when our dividends came rolling in⁠—I still had dividends at that time,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan parenthetically and sighed⁠—“came rolling in as regular as the solstices, we did, it is true, feel almost a twinge of social conscience. But we triumphantly allayed those twinges by subscribing to Settlements in the slums, or building, with a little of our redundant cash, a quite superfluous number of white-tiled lavatories for our workers. Those lavatories were to us what papal indulgences were to the less enlightened contemporaries of Chaucer. With the bill for those lavatories in our waistcoat pocket we could draw our next quarter’s dividends with a conscience perfectly serene. It justified us, too, even in our little frolics. And what frolics we had! Discreetly, of course. For in those days we couldn’t do things quite as openly as you do now. But it was very good fun, all the same. I seem to remember a quite phenomenal number of bachelor dinner parties at which ravishing young creatures used to come popping out of giant pies and dance <i xml:lang="fr">pas seuls</i> among the crockery on the table.” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan slowly shook his head and was silent in an ecstasy of recollection.</p>
			<p>“It sounds quite idyl‑lic,” said Miss Thriplow, drawlingly. She had a way of lovingly lingering over any particularly rare or juicy word that might find its way into her sentences.</p>
			<p>“It was,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan affirmed. “And the more so, I think, because it was so entirely against the rules of those good old days, and because so much discretion did have to be used. It may be merely that I’m old and that my wits have thickened with my arteries; but it does seem to me that love isn’t quite so exciting now as it used to be in my youth. When skirts touch the ground, the toe of a protruding shoe is an allurement. And there were skirts, in those days, draping everything. There was no frankness, no seen reality; only imagination. We were powder magazines of repression and the smallest hint was a spark. Nowadays, when young women go about in kilts and are as barebacked as wild horses, there’s no excitement. The cards are all on the table, nothing’s left to fancy. All’s aboveboard and consequently boring. Hypocrisy, besides being the tribute vice pays to virtue, is also one of the artifices by which vice renders itself more interesting. And between ourselves,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan, taking the whole table into his confidence, “it can’t do without those artifices. There’s a most interesting passage on this subject in Balzac’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Cousine Bette</i>. You remember the story?”</p>
			<p>“Such a wonderful⁠ ⁠… !” exclaimed <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Aldwinkle, with that large and indistinct enthusiasm evoked in her by every masterpiece of art.</p>
			<p>“It’s where Baron Hulot falls under the spell of Madame Marneffe: the old beau of the empire and the young woman brought up on the Romantic Revival and early Victorian virtues. Let me see if I can remember it.” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan thoughtfully frowned, was silent for a moment, then proceeded in an almost flawless French. “ ‘<i xml:lang="fr">Cet homme de l’empire, habitué au genre empire, devait ignorer absolument les façons de l’amour moderne, les nouveaux scrupules, les différentes conversations inventées depuis 1830, et où la “pauvre faible femme” finit par se faire considérer comme la victime des désirs de son amant, comme une sœur de charité qui panse des blessures, comme un ange qui se dévoue. Ce nouvel art d’aimer consomme énormément de paroles évangéliques à l’œuvre du diable. La passion est un martyre. On aspire à l’idéal, à l’infini de part et d’autre; l’on veut devenir meilleur par l’amour. Toutes ces belles phrases sont un prétexte à mettre encore plus d’ardeur dans la pratique, plus de rage dans les chutes</i> (<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan rolled out these words with a particular sonority) <i xml:lang="fr">que par le passé. Cette hypocrisie, le caractère de notre temps a gangrené la galanterie.</i>’ How sharp that is,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan, “how wide and how deep! Only I can’t agree with the sentiment expressed in the last sentence. For if, as he says, hypocrisy puts more ardour into the practice of love and more ‘rage in the chutes,’ then it cannot be said to have gangrened gallantry. It has improved it, revivified it, made it interesting. Nineteenth-century hypocrisy was a concomitant of nineteenth-century literary romanticism: an inevitable reaction, like that, against the excessive classicism of the eighteenth century. Classicism in literature is intolerable because there are too many restrictive rules; it is intolerable in love because there are too few. They have this in common, despite their apparent unlikeness, that they are both matter-of-fact and unemotional. It is only by inventing rules about it which can be broken, it is only by investing it with an almost supernatural importance, that love can be made interesting. Angels, philosophers and demons must haunt the alcove; otherwise it is no place for intelligent men and women. No such personages were to be found there in classical times; still less in the neoclassic. The whole process was as straightforward, prosaic, quotidian, and <i xml:lang="fr">terre à terre</i> as it could be. It must really have become very little more interesting than eating dinner⁠—not that I disparage that, mind you, particularly nowadays; but in my youth”⁠—<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan sighed⁠—“I set less stock in those days by good food. Still, even now, I have to admit, there’s not much excitement, not much poetry in eating. It is, I suppose, only in countries where powerful taboos about food prevail that the satisfaction of hunger takes on a romantic aspect. I can imagine that a strictly-brought-up Jew in the time of Samuel might sometimes have been seized by almost irresistible temptations to eat a lobster or some similar animal that divides the hoof but does not chew the cud. I can imagine him pretending to his wife that he was going to the synagogue; but in reality he slinks surreptitiously away down a sinister alley to gorge himself illicitly in some house of ill fame on pork and lobster mayonnaise. Quite a drama there. I give you the notion, gratis, as the subject for a story.”</p>
			<p>“I’m most grateful,” said Miss Thriplow.</p>
			<p>“And then, remember, the next morning, after the most portentous dreams all the night through, he’ll wake up tremendously strict, a Pharisee of the Pharisees, and he’ll send a subscription to the society for the Protection of Public Morals and another to the Anti-Lobster League. And he’ll write to the papers saying how disgraceful it is that young novelists should be allowed to publish books containing revolting descriptions of ham being eaten in mixed company, of orgies in oyster shops, with other culinary obscenities too horrible to be mentioned. He’ll do all that, won’t he, Miss Mary?”</p>
			<p>“Most certainly. And you forgot to say,” added Miss Thriplow, forgetting that she was the head girl in the convent school, “that he’ll insist more strictly than ever on his daughters being brought up in perfect ignorance of the very existence of sausages.”</p>
			<p>“Quite right,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan. “All of which was merely meant to show how exciting even eating might become if religion were brought into it, if dinner were made a mystery and the imagination thoroughly stirred every time the gong sounded. Conversely, how tedious love becomes when it is taken as matter-of-factly as eating dinner. It was essential for the men and women of 1830, if they didn’t want to die of pure boredom, to invent the <i xml:lang="fr">pauvre faible femme</i>, the martyr, the angel, the sister of charity, to talk like the Bible while they were consummating the devil’s work. The sort of love that their predecessors of the eighteenth century and the empire had made was too prosaic a business. They turned to hypocrisy in mere self-preservation. But the present generation, tired of playing at Madame Marneffe, has reverted to the empire notions of Baron Hulot.⁠ ⁠… Emancipation is excellent, no doubt, in its way. But in the end it defeats its own object. People ask for freedom; but what they finally get turns out to be boredom. To those for whom love has become as obvious an affair as eating dinner, for whom there are no blushful mysteries, no reticences, no fancy-fostering concealments, but only plain speaking and the facts of nature⁠—how flat and stale the whole business must become! It needs crinolines to excite the imagination and dragonish duennas to inflame desire to passion. Too much light conversation about the Oedipus complex and anal erotism is taking the edge off love. In a few years, I don’t mind prophesying, you young people will be whispering to one another sublime things about angels, sisters of charity and the infinite. You’ll be sheathed in Jaeger and pining behind bars. And love, in consequence, will seem incomparably more romantic, more alluring than it does in these days of emancipation.” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan spat out the pips of his last grape, pushed the fruit plate away from him, leaned back in his chair and looked about him triumphantly.</p>
			<p>“How little you understand women,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Aldwinkle, shaking her head. “Doesn’t he, Mary?”</p>
			<p>“Some women, at any rate,” Miss Thriplow agreed. “You seem to forget, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan, that Diana is quite as real a type as Venus.”</p>
			<p>“Exactly,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Aldwinkle. “You couldn’t have put it more succinctly.” Eighteen years ago, she and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan had been lovers. Elzevir, the pianist, had succeeded him⁠—a short reign⁠—to be followed by Lord Trunion⁠—or was it <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Lecoing?⁠—or both? At the moment <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Aldwinkle had forgotten these facts. And when she did remember, it was not quite in the way that other people⁠—<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan, for example⁠—remembered them. It was all wonderfully romantic, now; and she had been Diana all the time.</p>
			<p>“But I entirely agree with you,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan. “I unequivocally admit the existence of Artemis. I could even prove it for you empirically.”</p>
			<p>“That’s very good of you,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Aldwinkle, trying to be sarcastic.</p>
			<p>“The only figure on Olympus whom I have always regarded as being purely mythical,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cardan went on, “as having no foundation in the facts of life, is Athena. A goddess of wisdom⁠—a <em>goddess</em>!” he repeated with emphasis. “Isn’t that a little too thick?”</p>
			<p>Majestically <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Aldwinkle rose from the table. “Let us go out into the garden,” she said.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
